Preface

This statement of America's National Security Strategy builds on my initial report to the Congress and theAmerican people last year. In the twelve months since,the strategy outlined in that first report has served thenation well in protecting our interests and advancingour security objectives around the world.

In last year's report I noted that, at the outset of thisAdministration, I had set forth four broad objectivesthat underpinned our ational Security Strategy. Theywere:First, to restore our nation's military strength after aperiod of decline in which the Soviet Union overtook us in many critical categories of militarypower;Second, to restore our nation's economic strengthand reinvigorate the world economic system;Third, to restore the nation's international prestigeas a world leader; andFourth, to restore pride among all Americans andcarry our message to the world that individuals andnot governments should control their economic,spiritual and political destinies.

Our National Security Strategy continues to be aimedat reinforcing the gains we have achieved in each ofthese areas, while employing all the elements of ournational power-political, economic and military-in acoordinated way to advance the full range of national security interests outlined elsewhere in this report.

The fundamentals of our strategy change little fromyear to year; our interests and objectives are derivedfrom enduring values. Much of the discussion in thisreport therefore parallels that of last year, with changesas necessary to reflect significant developments in theinterim. These include:Our persistence and adherence to principle haveborne fruit in the historic agreement to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) - the first of the nuclear era to achieve meaningful reductions inU.S. and Soviet arsenals. The treaty is a victory forthe Atlantic Alliance as well, reflecting the firmnessthat all allies showed. We have also made furtherprogress toward a START agreement that could cutU.S. and Soviet strategic offensive arms by 50percent.Our SDI program is making great progress, movingus toward the prospect of a safer world - one which depends for its security on strategic defense, ratherthan on the threat of mutual nuclear retaliation.In the Persian Gulf we have augmented ourtraditional military presence to prevent Iran frominterfering with U.s.-flag shipping and to supportour diplomatic efforts to bring an end to the tragicIran-Iraq war. Our allies' contributions to the safenavigation of the Gulf by non-belligerent shippingare welcomed, and underline the importance whichthe Free World ascribes to this strategically andeconomically pivotal region of the world.Critical imbalances remain in the international economy which could portend problems ahead unless they are addressed in a forthright andeffective manner by the governments of theindustrialized nations. The major world economies,including our own, are sound and can provide thebasis for continued growth and prosperity, providedwe and our partners deal with important fiscal,trade and budgetary issues in sensible andcooperative ways.In the Soviet Union we hear talk of "new thinking"and of basic changes in Soviet policies at homeand abroad. We will welcome real changes, but wehave yet to see any slackening of the growth ofSoviet military power, or abandonment of expansioni st aspi rations. As we work to find areas for further cooperation, we will continue to judge theSoviets by their actions, rather than their words, andto found our National Security Strategy on arealistic view of Soviet aims and capabilities.On many continents, efforts by the Soviet Unionand its clients to impose or maintain Leninist regimes by force of arms are meeting increasing resistance. In Afghanistan, Nicaragua, Angola, andCambodia, anti-Communist insurgencies are raisingthe cost of aggression and offering hope of justpolitical solutions. Our strong support for Freedom Fighters, from Afghanistan to Nicaragua, is a vital insurance policy for peace with freedom. We areencouraging the broader democratic trend in theworld-from Latin America to the Philippines, to theRepublic of Korea.At home, however, the reluctance on the part of theCongress to provide the financial resources necessary to support our National Security Strategyis a cause for rising concern. Our assessment ofrisks to important U.s. interests has increased, andsome of the recent gains in redressing the militaryand geopolitical balance are in jeopardy. The implications of this adverse trend, now in its thirdyear, are discussed in more detail in the final chapter of th is report.

I forward this report with the confidence that it willhelp the Congress and the American people betterunderstand our National Security Strategy and contribute to the consensus needed to enable us to fulfillour responsibilities as leader of the world'sdemocracies.

As I said in last year's report, we must never forgetthat freedom is never really free; it is the most costlything in the world. And freedom is never paid for in alump sum. Installments come due in every generation.All any of us can do is offer the generations thatfollow a chance for freedom. In the final analysis, thisis the assurance that our National Security Strategyseeks to provide. I commend its reading to allAmericans.

I. Historical Dimensions of U.S. National Security StrategyThis is my second report to the Congress on ourNational Security Strategy. Its focus is on how theprincipal elements of national power-diplomatic andinformational, economic and military-can beemployed to support our national interests and promote the objectives of peace, security, and freedom. Itanalyzes the major political, economic, and military threats to our interests, and discusses the strategiesthat we believe most appropriate to respond to those threats and to help shape the future in accordancewith our positive goals and ideals. It also discussessome of the dilemmas, tradeoffs and risks thatAmerica faces, because we realize that our knowledgeof our adversaries is never certain and that allresources, including our national will, are finite.

Walter Lippmann once wrote:. . . the behavior of nations over a long period oftime is the most reliable, though not the only indexof their national interests. For though their interestsare not eternal, they are remarkably persistent . . . There is no great mystery why this shouldbe: the facts of geography are permanent . . . thussuccessive generations of men tend to face the samerecurrent problems and to react to them in more orless habitual ways.

Lippmann's observation is particularly apt. While it iscommonplace to hear that u.s. National Security Strategy changes erratically every four to eight years asa result of a new Administration taking office, in reality there is a remarkable consistency over time whenour policies are viewed in historical perspective. Thecore interests and objectives of this Nation havechanged little since World War II.

The first historical dimension of our strategy isrelatively simple, clear-cut, and immensely sensible. Itis the conviction that the United States' most basic national security interests would be endangered if ahostile state or group of states were to dominate theEurasian landmass-that area of the globe often referred to as the world's heartland. We fought twoworld wars to prevent this from occurring. And, since1945, we have sought to prevent the Soviet Unionfrom capitalizing on its geostrategic advantage todominate its neighbors in Western Europe, Asia, andthe Middle East, and thereby fundamentally alter theglobal balance of power to our disadvantage.

The national strategy to achieve this objective hasbeen containment, in the broadest sense of that term.Administrations have differed over which instrumentsof national power-diplomatic and informational,economic or military-should receive the most attention at any particular time. But, in the final analysis,every Administration since World War II has endorsedthe concept that the United States, in partnership withits allies, must prevent the Soviet Union from dominating those great concentrations of industrial powerand human capacity that are Western Europe and EastAsia. Thus, shortly after World War II, the United States helped rebuild, through the Marshall Plan, thewar-ravaged economies of Europe, limiting Soviet opportunities to exploit Europe's economic distress. Inaddition, America deployed military forces forward, asnecessary, to help deter and contain Soviet military expansion. As Soviet capabilities grew, our securityalso required a large strategic nuclear force to augment the forward-deployed conventional deterrent andto reinforce our deterrence of both nuclear and conventional attacks on ourselves or our allies.

The advent of nuclear weapons and intercontinentaldelivery systems added another dimension to ourthinking about National Security Strategy: these weapons became the primary threat to our national survival. Thus, for over forty years, the deterrence ofnuclear war and the reduction of its threat have beenmajor objectives of U.S. National Security Strategy. Wehave pursued these objectives with renewed vigor, andheartening results, during this Administration.

Similarly, the economic element of our national powerhas long been an important component of our National Security Strategy. This Administration's strong support for an open and expanding world economyand trading system reflects a fundamental national interest. The industrial democracies have long been important trading nations. An open world of enterpriseand the free movement of people, goods, and ideasare not only the keys to our prosperity, but basicmoral principles. We see an expanding global prosperity as enhancing our own. The global economy isclearly even more interdependent now than early inthis century when America first endorsed these principles; and our need for access to markets and rawmaterials has increased. As a result, our commitmentto free and fair trade among nations is greater todaythan ever.

The facts of geography, as Lippmann pointed out,dictate basic dimensions of our National Security Strategy. Since the early 19th century we have notfeared invasion of the American mainland; and evento this day, our national territory remains relatively secure against conventional attack, protected byoceans on the east and west and friendly nations toour immediate north and south. However, nuclear weapons and the means to deliver those weapons overgreat distances can now threaten our national survival.And most of our friends and allies-as well as themarkets and resources that are integrated with oureconomy-are physically distant from the continental United States.

To help protect our friends and allies, and other U.s.interests abroad, we must not only possess national strength, but we must be able to project this powerdiplomatic and informational, economic, andmilitary-across great sea and air distances. In themilitary sphere, we must maintain the capability tosecure our worldwide lines of communication; to project military power quickly; to sustain forces at great distances for extended periods of time; and to pose acredible deterrent to those who might contemplate aggression against our allies and friends.

The United States has long recognized that, even aswe have taken up a major role of world leadership,our interests and political values call for a deepening partnership with like-minded nations to advance thecause of peace and freedom. Thus, an abiding commitment to strong alliances has been a consistent andvital component of American strategy since the Second World War. Even if we could afford, economically and militarily, to chart our ational Security Strategy without allies-which we cannot-we wouldnot want to do so. "Fortress America" is an obsolete concept. Such a policy would be dangerously misguided and self-defeating. Solidarity with our alliesmultiplies the strength of all. It permits a sharing ofresponsibilities and it reminds us that the cause ofdemocracies is, after all, one of our most fundamentalgoals.

As with all Administrations, during our stewardship wehave faced unique security challenges-and opportunities- presented by a dynamic world and America'sown needs. This has given our National Security Strategy two additional emphases worth noting. Thefirst is realism. We have sought to deal with the worldas it is, not as we might wish it to be. A strategy without illusions, based on observable facts, has beenour goal. We attempt to deal with both friends andadversaries on a basis that recognizes that acts aremore important than words, and that frankness is thefoundation of productive and enduring relationshipsamong nations. At the same time, we have emphasized our willingness to dialogue-to engage our adversaries, in particular, in negotiations aimed at findingareas of common interest, reducing sources of tension,and rendering our relations more stable and predictable. By emphasizing realism and a willingness totalk, we have been able to place our arms reduction negotiations with the Soviets on a more solid basis,culminating in the first agreement between the superpowers to achieve significant reductions in nuclear arsenals.

This list of historical dimensions of u.s. National Security Strategy could be extended. Academics andpractitioners have debated the issue for years. But thefundamental point should be clear: there has been impressive continuity in U.s. National Security Strategy,reflecting the fact that the strategy is grounded in unchanging geographic considerations, and designed topreserve the fundamental values of our democracy.II. Fundamentals of U.S. National Security Strategy

THE FRAMEWORKK-- VALUES, INTERESTS, AND NATIONAL SECURITY OBJECTIVES

Traditionally national security has been viewed as protection from external allack, thought of largely interms of military defenses against military threats. Butthat is clearly too narrow a conception. A nation'ssecurity today involves much more than the procurement and application of military forces.

National Security Strategy must start with the valuesthat we as a nation prize. Last year, in observing the200th anniversary of our Constitution, we celebratedthese values with a sense of rededication-values suchas human dignity, personal freedom, individual rights,the pursuit of happiness, peace and prosperity. Theseare the values that lead us to seek an internationalorder that encourages self-determ ination, democratic institutions, economic development, and human rights.The ultimate purpose of our National Security Strategyis to protect and advance those values. But, if they areto serve as the basis of a National Security Strategy,these values must be translated into the more concreteterms of national interests and objectives.

U.S. Interests

Our National Security.5trategy reflects our national interests and presents a broad plan for achieving the national objectives that support those interests. The keynational interests which our strategy seeks to assureand protect include:1. The survival of the United States as a free and independent nation, with its fundamental values intactand its institutions and people secure.2. A healthy and growing U.S. economy to provide opportunity for individual prosperity and a resourcebase for our national endeavors.3. A stable and secure world, free of major threats tou.s. interests.4. The growth of human freedom, democratic institutions, and free market economies throughout theworld, linked by a fair and open international tradingsystem.5. Healthy and vigorous alliance relationships.

Major Objectives in Support of U.S. Interests

U.s. national security objectives are broad goals refined from our national interests. They provide ageneral guide for strategy in specific situations whichcall for the coordinated use of national power. Ourprincipal national security objectives are:

1. To maintain the security of our nation and ourallies. The United States, in cooperation with its allies,must seek to deter any aggression that could threatenthat security and, should deterrence fail, must beprepared to repel or defeat any military attack andend the conflict on terms favorable to the United States, its interests, and its allies.Specifically:To deter hostile attack on the United States, itscitizens, military forces, or allies and to defeat attack if deterrence fails.To deal effeetively with threat to the security of theUnited States and its citizens short of armed conflict, including the threat of international terrorism.To preven the domination of the Eurasian landmassby the Soviet Union, or any other hostile power orcoalition of powers.To prevent transfer of militarily critical technologiesand resources to the Soviet bloc and hostile countries or groups.To reduce our reliance on nuclear weapons bystrengthening our conventional forces, pursuing equitable and verifiable arms control agreementsand developing technologies for strategic defense.To assure unimpeded u.s. access to the oceans andspace.To foster closer relations with the People's Republicof China.To prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.

2. To respond to the challenges of the global conomy. Our national security and economic strengthare indivisible. As the global economy evolves in increasingly interdependent ways, we must be aware ofeconomic factors that may affect our national security,in war in the future. Since our dpendence on foreign source of supply has grown in many criticalarea, the potential vulnerability of our supply lines isa matter of concern. Additionally, the threat of aglobal spiral of protectionism must be combatted, andthe problem of debt in the developing world is aburden on international prosperity.Specifically:To promote a strong, prosperous and competitiveU.S. economy, in the context of a stable and growing world economy.To ensure access to foreign markets, energy, andmineral resources by the United States and it alliesand friends.To promote a well-functioning international economic system with minimal distortions to trade and investment, with stable currencies, and broadly agreed and respected rules for managing andresolving differences.

3. To defend and advance the cause of democracy,freedom, and human rights throughout the world. Toignore the fate of millions around the world who seekfreedom betrays our national heritage and over timewould endanger our own freedom and that of ourallies.Specifically:To promote national independence and the growthof free institutions worldwide.To encourage and support aid, trade, and investment programs that promote economic development and the growth of free and humane socialand political orders in the Third World.To encourage liberalizing tendencies within theSoviet Union and its client states.

4. To resolve peacefully disputes which affect u.s. interest in troubled regions of theworld. Regional conflict which involve allies or friends of the United States may threaten u.s. interests, and frequently posethe risk of escalation to wider conflagration. Conflicts,or attempts to subvert friendly governments, which areinstigated or supported by the Soviets and their clientstate, represent particularly serious threat to the international system and thereby to u.s. interests.Specifically:To address, where possible, the root causes ofregional instabilities which create the risk of war.To maintain maintain stable regional military balancesvis-a-vis the Soviet Union and states aligned with itTo neutralize the efforts of the Soviet Union to increase its influence in the world, and to weaken thelinks between the Soviets and their client states inthe Third World.To aid in combatting threats to the stability offriendly governments and institutions from insurgencies, subversion, state-sponsored terrorism and theinternational trafficking of illicit drugs.

5. To build effective and friendly relationships with allnation with whom there is a basis of shared concern.In the world today, there are over 150 nations. Notone of them is the equal of the United States in totalpower or wealth, but each is sovereign, and most, ifnot all, touch u.s. interests directly or indirectly.Specifically:To make major international institutions more effective in promoting peace, world order and political,economic and social progress.To seek opportunities to improve relations with theSoviet Union on a realistic and reciprocal basis.To improve relations with other nations hostile to usin order to red uce the chan e of future conflict.To strengthen U.s. influence throughout the world.

PRINCIPAL THREATS TO U.S. INTERESTS

The most significant threat to U.s. security interests remains the global challenge posed by the SovietUnion. Despite reforms that the leadership of the Soviet Un ion has recently undertaken - the si gnificanceand durability of which remain unclear-Soviet military power and active diplomacy continue forcefully tochallenge our vital interests in many parts of theworld. The Soviet Union places a high priority oncreating and exploiting divisions within and amongthe Western allies. In key developing countries it supports communist parties, insurgent movements, andother elements that seek to undermine governments allied with or friendly to the United States and to replace them with authoritarian or totalitarian regimes.In other developing countries, modernizing forces struggling to create or consolidate democratic and freemarket societies are actively opposed by groups supported or inspired by the Soviet Union and its allies.

As a result of changes in leadership style, the SovietUnion has succeeded in projecting a more favorable international image. Proposed domestic reforms andforeign policy initiatives have given rise, in somecases, to hopes for fundamental changes in Soviet behavior. The new style of Soviet policy has itspolitical impact. Moscow is moving in new directions,offering an array of initiatives, putting old assumptionsin doubt, attracting new support internationally, andsometimes placing Western governments on the defensive. This poses a new, continuing, and moresophisticated challenge to Western policy. Whether recent changes constitute a reat opportunity for morefundamental improvements in relations with the SovietUnion remains to be seen. We are open-minded onthis score. While recognizing the competitive andpredominantly adversarial character of our relationship, we shall maintain a dialogue with the SovietUnion in order to seize opportunities for more constructive relations.

Although the Soviet Union still poses the primary security threat, we and our allies and friends also facea diversity of other serious security challenges:regional and low-intensity conflicts; the potential fornuclear proliferation; international terrorism; narcotics trafficking; radical politico-religious movements; andproblems of instability, succession, and economic development in countries that are important friendsand allies.

In Europe, the principal threat to Am ric's interests,and to those of our allies, continues to be that posedby the ongoing buildup of Warsaw Pact military capabilities. For decade the Soviet Union has allo ated adisproportionately high share of its national income tomil itary expend itu res and has created technologically sophisticated forces far in exce s of any plausible needfor self-defense. Equally threatening, but much moresubtle, is the continuous political wart re against Western cohesion through propaganda, particularly focused on the younger generations of Western Europeans. Through such means the Soviet Union isattempting to affect public opinion in allied countriesto weaken relations with the United States, erode thecommitment to defense, and encourage support forSoviet policies and proposal. Ultimately, the SovietUnion still seeks to separate West rn Europe politically and militarily from the United States,thereby altering the global balance of power in themost fundamental way.

Beyond the challenges in Europe, other areas givecause for concern. Free World interests in the MiddleEast are seriously th reatened by the protracted warbetween Iran and Iraq, and by Iran's drive to becomethe dominant power in the region. Tehran's threats tofriendly Gulf States and to international shipping inthe Persian Gulf have caused the Uni d States andseveral of its allies to provide naval protection for theirown shipping, and to assist certain of the Gulf States.The aggressive radical regime in Iran persists inthreatening its neighbors which are friends of theUnited States with military force, and through terrorism and subversion. Its terrorist surrogates in Lebanon fuel the anarchy in that stricken country, whileIran advertises its willingness to use terrorism against United States personnel and facilities in the MiddleEast and elsewh reo Whatever Iran's mistrust of thSoviet Union, Iran's policies undermine Western friends and Western relationships in the Middle Eastand objectively benefit the Soviet Union globally.

Fragile democratic governments in Central and South America are being confronted by myriad social andeconomic problems. At the same time, radical and insurgent groups supported by the Soviets, the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, and by Cuba are asource of political destabilization. Prospects for an enduring peace in Central America will be bleak as longas the Sandinista leaders betray their promises of genuinely democratic government and support insurgent forces attempting to subvert their neighbors.

Other regional tensions and conflicts-such as thoseon the Korean peninsula, in Indochina, in Southern Africa, and between Israel and its Arab neighbors threaten both international peace and the internal stability of friendly states. In the Philippines, for example, the fledging democratic government is besiegedby a variety of extremist forces some of which wish toimpose authoritarian regimes.

Low intensity conflicts, the increasing linkages between internationa I terrorists and narcotics traffickers,as well as racial, sectarian, and other tensions continue to challenge u.s. interests and our hopes forhuman betterment. Refugees from these conflicts canplace powerful burdens on the economies andsocieties of host countries, and requi re substantial quantities of international relief.

The spread of nuclear weapons to additional nations threatens to exacerbate regional conflicts and could conceivably involve the United States and the SovietUnion in nuclear conflicts. This proliferation could ultimately make nuclear deterrence less stable. At thistime, the most d ifficu It regional nuclear rival ry involves India and Pakistan, but other areas of theworld, including the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America could be subject to similar dangers in thefuture.

Although in recent years the international economicand financial system has proved to be remarkably resilient, sudden, unexpected shocks can pose majornew challenges to U.s. interests. The hard currencydebts of many developing nations-including severalthat are neighbors and important friends and allies ofthe United States- have had severe and destabilizing consequences within their societies. Most of thedebtor states have been unable to achieve sustainedand significant economic growth since the early 1980sand have experienced high rates of unemploymentand inflation, and extended periods of unpopular austerity. Many of these countries are also adversely affected by low commodity prices in the international market, capital flight, excessive government spending,narcotics production and trafficking, and other indigenous and externally imposed problems that willnot be easily remedied. The longer the economies ofthe major debtor states fail to rebound from these conditions, the greater are the possibi Iities that irresponsible elements will gain local support for nationalistic responses that could damage important LJ.5.interests.

In addition, rising pressure in some major trading nations for greater protection from foreign competitioncould place powerful new downward pressure onthese national economies. Potentially, this could resultin a spiral of protectionist measures that would endanger the international trading system.

Finally, the prospects for world peace and prosperity-and thus for U.S. interest in a just and progressive international order-will be influenced by other problems in certain parts of the world. Critical shortagesof food, a lack of health services, and inabilities tomeet other basic needs will keep millions of people,particularly in Africa, in peril. The dangerous depletion or contamination of the natural endowments ofsome nations-soil, forests, water, air-will add to their environmental and health problems, and increasinglyto those of the global community. These problems cannot be resolved simply through outside assistance,for many of them will require policy changes andleadership by governments and elites in the countries themselves. But all create potential threats to thepeace and prosperity that are in our national interest,as well as the interests of the affected nations.

In summary, this broad range of threats to our national interests provides the backdrop against which we formulate our ational Security Strategy. As we seekways to promote our national interests and objectives,a careful understanding of these evolving threats isessential to proper strategy formulation.

III. Power, Policy, and Strategy

ELEMENTS OF u.S. NATIONAL POWER

Having described our national security interests, objectives, and the range of threats that we face, it isappropriate next to turn to the national means available to achieve our objectives, and to the strategies that relate means to ends.

The means available are the elements of nationalpower that the United States possesses-diplomaticand informational, economic and military-and whichwe employ to influence the behavior of other nations.Power, it is often said, is the quintessence of strategy.Unfortunately, America's national power is sometimes thought of only in coercive or military terms. I believe,however, that national power is also derived from anation's moral legitimacy and leadership, as we exemplified by the Marshall Plan after World War II-anact of strengthening allies, of enlightened self-interest.Today, nations understand that the effective use of national power is something more than the simple useof force; and we seek to follow a ational Security Strategy that ensures we can relate to other nations onthe basis of credibility rather than simple capability.

We have an exceptionally diverse array of instrumentsfor employing the various elements of national power.Exercised by the Executive Departments and Agencies,these tools are most effective when integrated, tailoredto the specific situation, and guided by a common strategy for their implementation. These instruments include:Moral and political example. American spirit andprosperity represent a critical challenge to theideology and the practical record of our adversaries:free, pluralist societies work. Since the days of ourFounding Fathers, this power of example hasrepresented a potent leverage in international relations. But we should not leave its expression andunderstanding to chance. It is in our interest tospread this message in an organized and effectiveway.Military strength. A strong military capability isessential for a stable, secure environment in whichour adversaries are deterred and diplomacy can beeffective.Economic vitality. America's economic strength sustains our other elements of power and fortifies ourrelations with the countries that share our interestin a free and open international economy.Alliance relationships. The pursuit of American security objectives depends on cooperation withlike-minded international partners. These relationsh ips enhance our strength and mitigate the understandable reluctance of the American people toshoulder security burdens alone. The predictable difficulties that arise from time to time in allalliance relationships must be measured against theenormous benefits that these ties bring us and ourfriends.Public diplomacy. This is a key instrument-onewith an impact both strong and subtle on international political events and how people perceivethem. Through our public diplomacy activities, weseek to explain to foreign audiences our policiesand actions in ways that are clear, credible, andIikely to el icit support for our interests andobjectives.Security assistance. By helping friendsand allies acquire the means to defend themselves, we complement the rebuilding of our own military trengthand increase the human and material resources available for the defense of free world interests. Inthe proc ss, we reduce the likelihood of dir ctAmerican involvement in potential onflicts. Security assitance is a key instrument in our national security strategies, a productive and highly leveragd investment that promotes our security interestsat bargain prices.Development assistance. It is in our national interestto support efforts of friendly developing countries toprovide for the basic need f their people.Development assistance plays a vital role in encouraging market-oriented approaches with the potentialto increase income levels in recipient countries. Awell structured and financed development assistance program enhance our world leadershipand influence.Science and technology cooperation. For manycountries, access to advance scientific and technological resources is critical to prosperity and longterm economic growth. U.S. world leadership andour vast resources in science and technology areimportant strategic assets to strengthen existing tieswith friends and allies, and promote positive relationships with key developing nations.International organizations. ultilateral diplomacyand participation in international organizations suchas the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund provide opportunities to address common global problems and share the task of solving them.Skillful diplomacy within these and other multilateral organizations can serve to enhance ouroverall goals on issues such as peacekeeping, promotion of human rights, and encouraging the development of free economic and political systems.Diplomatic mediation. In regions where conflict threaten our interests or those of our friends,political efforts can play a major role in ending violence, promoting freedom and national selfdetermination, and laying the foundations for future stability. The initiatives of American diplomacy taketheir strength from effective and integrated use ofthe tools already discussed, and from the ability ofu.s. representatives to act credibly as mediators ofdisputes. Making clear the firmness of our commitments to friends and allies increases the incentives to negotiate seriously.

A PERIOD OF TRANSITION

We are living in times that historians will characterizeas a period of transition in international security affairs. As noted in my first National Security Strategy Report, this transition really began in the late 1970swhen our policies to rebuild our allies' economieshad long since succeeded, and America no longerheld an overwhelmingly predominant economic position vis-a-vis Western Europe and East Asia. Thisrealignment of economic strength is likely to continueinto the next decade with the further evolution of EastAsia's industrial economies, particularly that of China.

This transition period has also been marked by the Soviet Union's massive military buildup-consuming asmuch as 15-17 percent of annual GNP. This large, unmatched investment provided the Soviets by the 1980sa position of strategic nuclear parity, quantitative conventional force superiority around the Eurasianmainland, and a modern, globally deployed navy. Thebuildup has also supported the projection of Soviet influence into many areas of the world-particularly theunstable Third World regions of Southeast andSouthwest Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Thebuildup's consequences will continue to present a major threat to our security and that of our allies foryears to come.

Two other major trend characterize this period oftransition in international security affairs. The first isthe revolution in military technology that is alreadywell underway. New surveillance and targeting systems, new means of destruction, and low observable(stealth) technology will soon provide military capabilities previously thought wholly infeasible.Similarly, rapid advances in microelectronics willallow the command, control and communications integrated with intelligenc sources, to provide the necessary strategic and tactical direction of suchadvanced military operations.Our military leaders, as well as those of our adversaries, are now rethinking military doctrines and force structures as a result of these and other applications ofadvanced technology to military power. As this trend continues, military competition is likely to focus increasingly on non-nuclear weapons, where thecombinations of stealth and extreme accuracy at longranges will reopen the possibility of non-nuclear strategic attack. Space will also become a more prominent area of activity, not the least because of its growing importance for air, ground, and naval warfare. Weexpect th this revolution in military technology willcontinue w II into the next decade and necessitate theadaptation both of military doctrines and of national security strategies. In this regard, the recent report ofthe bipartisan Commi sion on Integrated long-TermStrategy helps bring into ocus the essentiality ofmaintaining our technological superiority through coherent military res arch and development programaimed at e ploiting emerging strategic opportunitie .

The last major trend of this transition period is the diffusion of economic power and advanced technologyto the Third World. This combination of economic growth and technological maturation has already provided several countries with an independent capabilityto produce large numbers of advanced weapon systems, both for their own use and or export. Thus,countries dependent on neither the United States northe Soviet Union could in the not too distant future possess the capability to conduct a major war, eitheragainst each other or against a world power. Thearsenal at the disposal of these sovereign countriesare likely to include chemical weapons, and mayeventually include nuclear weapons and space systemsfor target location. As this trend continues, the potential for mid- and high-intensity conflict increases inmany regions of th world, some of which are already suffering from various types of low inten ity conflict.

In responding to these emerging features of the strategic landscape, we have formulated our strategies toplay to our strengths and to exploit our adversaries'weaknesses. For xample, our defense policies stressthat the United State and its allies must continue toenjoy technological superiority over the Soviet Union.The West's spirit of inquiry and the free flow of information permit technology and innovation to flourishto a far greater degree than in a closed society. Ouradvantages in areas such as precision guided munitions, stealth technology, submarine quieting, andsuper-computer tchnology are important strategic assets and we intend to exploit them, and to protectthem from Soviet attempts to acquire them- either bypurchase or theft.

In a similar manner, our diplomatic policies aredesigned to play to the strength of our alliance relationships. In Europe, we and our NATO allies are partner in a voluntary coalition of sovereign, equal nations-in stark contrast to the Warsaw Pact and theEastern European countries still dominated by Soviet military power. In this period of transition we havenew opportunities as our allies display an increasing willingness to seek a larger role in providing for Western European defense. We welcome this trend, knowing we are working from the strength of an abiding alliance partnership, and that increasing allied contributions are important to assuring the Alliance's longterm effectiveness and viability.But the period of transition is not over; and administrations after mine will continue to adapt strategic concepts and policies to the realities of an evolving world-one in which America must alway play aleading role, to help shape a positive future forourselves and our aliides.

The remainder of this section discusses the fundamental policies-diplomatic, economic and defense-thatguide our use of the elements of national power as weformulate strategy. These policy guidelines provide coherence and consistency among the set of integrated strategies which are discussed in the chapterthat follow.

U.S. DIPLOMATIC POLICY Policies to Move America Forward

As I have stated on many occasion, our diplomacyhas aimed at ensuring, in the nuclear age, both peaceand freedom. Working with our aliies and friends, wehave sought to push beyond the stalemates of thepostwar era and directly confront two transcendentissues affecting our national security-the danger ofnuclear warfare and the continuing expansion of totalitarian rule.

In dealing with the nuclear threat, we have gonebeyond traditional arms control and, together with ourNATO allies, have sought verifiable reduction innuclear arsenals. At the same time, we have launcheda new program of research into ways to defend ourselves against ballistic missile attack. In doing so, weseek to maintain deterrence while moving away fromreliance on retaliation, and toward a situation inwhich ballistic missiles will ultimately be rendered obsolete.

While we have sought arms reductions and greaterreliance on defensive measures, we have never lostsight of the fact that nations do not disagree becausethey are armed; they are armed because they disagreeon very important matters of human life and liberty.The fundamental differences between totalitarian anddemocratic rule remain. We cannot gloss them over,nor can we be content with accepted spheres of influence, a world only half free. Thus, we have soughtto advance the cause of freedom where opportunitiesexist to do so. Sometimes this means support forliberalization; sometimes Support for liberation.

In regional conflicts, for example, we have elaborateda policy of helping anti-Communist insurgents in their battle to bring self-determination, independence, andhuman rights to their own countries. This doctrine wasfirst reflected in our decision to assist the people ofAfghanistan in their fight against Soviet invasion andoccupation. It was an important part of our decisionto assist the people of Nicaragua in their battle torestore the integrity of their 1979 revolution and makethe Sandinista government keep its promise ofdemocratic rule. Our current efforts in Angola in support of freedom fighters constitute the most recent extension of this policy.

Undergirding all of this is our continuing commitmentto public candor about the nature of totalitarian ruleand the ultimate objectives of U.s. foreign policy:peace, yes, but world freedom as well. We refuse tobelieve that it is somehCM' an act of hostility to proclaim publicly the crucial moral distinctions between democracy and totalitarianism.

Informational Support to Diplomatic Power

We are faced with a profound challenge to our national security in the political field. This challenge isto fight the war of ideas and to help support thepolitical infrastructure of world democracies. To accomplish this we must be as committed to the use ofthe informational aspects of our diplomatic power asto the other elements which comprise it.

Here in the United States, public opinion polls consistently find that, depending on the issue, up totwo-thirds of the American electorate normally take nointerest in foreign policy. Moreover, only a slight majority of Americans today believe that this countryneeds to play an active part in world affairs. There isno natural domestic constituency for America's foreign policy-we must build one.

The agencies which we use to implement such an approach include the Departments of State and Defense,Agency for International Development (AID), and U.s.Information Agency (USIA), as well as several lesstraditional participants, including the Departments ofCommerce and Treasury, and the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). All contribute to our Public Diplomacy and related informational programs.

Another important way of achieving this is through theprivate sector. During the past seven years, we haveencouraged the American private sector to become akey element in the protjection of U.s. foreign policygoals. Leading private citizens and groups have takensteps to identify and organize the many local forces throughout America that have a direct stake in our nation's relations with the rest of the world. These private voluntary organizations are doing an indispensable job of public education. They have our strongest encouragement and support.

While we focus on the needs of an effective diplomatic and informational policy, we must keep inmind that the Soviet Union is pursuing a very aggressive public deception and propaganda program,using a wide range of techniques aimed not only atthe Third World, but also at us and Our alliance partners. The challenge is to counter Soviet propagandaand so-called "active measures" using the full range ofOur informational programs to tell the truth about American values, interests, and policies.

Our political and informational power must also reachto the peoples of denied areas, particularly the USSRand Eastern Europe-to encourage hope for changeand to educate publics on the benefits of free institutions. We undertake this through the electronic media,written materials, increased contacts and the exchangeof ideas that come from such contacts. Any process ofchange must find its roots within a closed society, but knowledge of the world at large may be astimulant; and the free flow of ideas and informationis, in itself, one of the goals of those who seekdemocratic change. For our part, we proceed from ourfundamental belief that a world composed of free,sovereign democracies will be a safer, more stableworld-one where respect for the dignity of all peoplehas a better chance to be realized.

u.s. ECONOMIC POLICY

International Economic Policy

u.s. national power rests on the strength of ourdomestic economy. A growing, resilient and techno-logically vigorous economy is vital to our national security. In peacetime it is the fundamental underpinning of our national defense capabilities. In a crisis orduring wartime it provides the ability to respond rapidly with skilled personnel, expanded production capacity, and supplies of critical materials. World WarsI and II demonstrated the vital importance of a strong domestic economy able to produce quickly andefficiently the goods needed to defend ourselves andour allies.

Our economic strength has domestic and international dimensions, although the distinctions are neither easynor rigid. Domestically, it is in our national security interest to maintain a dynamic research and development capability which enables us 10 be in the forefront of technological advance. Our manufacturing sector must remain competitive with those in otherleading industrial countries. Our financial and service industries must provide up-to-date tools for the continued growth of our economy. Other sectors of theeconomy, such as energy and transport, need to be ofsufficient size and diversity to provide a critical nucleus should we need to respond to an emergency.Finally, our labor force is-and will remain-a key element of our economic strength. An innovative, adaptive and educated labor force remains essential to thedevelopment of new technologies, the continued growth of our econom~ and the production of competitive goods.

While mindful of the need for a strong domestic economy, we do not-and should not-strive fordomestic economic self-suffiCiency or" for dominancein all economic sectors. Market economies are interdependent. Since 1945, we have pursued a vigorous policy, first, of helping rebuild the European andPacific economies devastated by war; and second, ofsupporting economic cooperation and developmentamong all Free World economies. We strongly believed then-as we do n()'N-that national economic strength is a shared strength. For example, we support European efforts at economic integration through theEuropean Community because we believe that astrong European economy will be better able to contribute the resources necessary for a strong Alliance defense. Likewise, the Free Trade Area Agreement recently negotiated with our largest trading partner,Canada, directly and positively contributes to our collective security in North America. Just as our defense depends on the cooperation and participation of ourallies, so does our economic prosperity. Thus oureconomic objectives in support of our security policies are necessarily global. However, one central consequence of our interdependence is that we cannot dictate economic policy but must consult andnegotiate, recognizing the realities of mutual dependence.

As the world's leading economic power, we have aresponsibility by our actions at home to help sustainand extend the global economic recovery. The unprecedented peacetime expansion of the American economy since 1982 provides a vivid demonstration ofthe power and creativity that free enterprise canunleash. However, the United States has not accomplished this alone. International flows of people,capital and goods have enabled us to improve ourstandard of living far beyond that which would haveresulted from a closed economy. In return, American technology, capital and goods have enabled othercountries to improve their economies. Our successalso provides constructive examples of the benefits ofopen societies and economies. At home we must implement economic policies that continue to promote growth, while holding down inflation and reducingthe federal deficit by controlled government spending.The budget compromise which we reached late lastyear with the leaders of the Congress is an importantstep toward those ends. Limiting the cost of central government will allow resources to be more productively used by the private sector. By reducing thefederal deficit and promoting private saving, we canreduce undue dependence on inflows of foreign capital and playa stronger role in providing capital tosupport growth in the global economy.

A natural consequence of societies' striving to growand be competitive in the world economy is periodic tension manifested in trade disputes and other bilateral economic difficulties. The United States, as theleading proponent of an open international trading system, has led in the construction of the present General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)system, which has promoted over the years a vigorous expansion of trade to the benefit of all. We are nowseeking to strengthen that system and bring it up todate. We strongly support the Uruguay Round ofmultilateral trade negotiations which aims further toreduce barriers to global trade. For the first time,agriculture, intellectual property rights, trade in service (such as banking, insurance and transportation),and investment will be the focus of serious negotiation.

History has shown that free, open economies withunrestricted trade are strong economies, which growfaster and have the resources with which to defend themselves. Open trade and cooperation among nations also help to cement alliances which in turnbolsters our coalition defense efforts. The challenge tothe United States now is to avoid letting tensions anddisputes over trade issues undermine domestic support for free trade, or become a catalyst for policieswhich only serve to reduce overall economic growth,and thus work in opposition to our security objectives.In this regard, we must actively resist the temptationto impose protectionist measures in order to copewith trade imbalances, while responding to thelegitimate concerns of U.s. industry about the unfairtrade practices of other countries. Protectionist trade legislation would be a major threat to our economic health, to economic and political relations with ourallies, and to our collective economic and military strength.

There are times, however, when we must restrict economic relations between the United States andother countries not only for reasons of national security, but to protest odious national behavior. By restricting economic relations, vve seek vigorously topersuade the target country that its behavior is unacceptable. For example, U.s. economic leverage isemployed against nations that threaten regional stability or support international terrorism, such as Cuba,libya and Nicaragua. Hovvever, economic sanctionsare never imposed without careful consideration, asthey inevitably impose costs on American business aswell as foreign clients. For that reason our policy willcontinue to be to use them sparingly, and only continue them when their need and effectiveness can beclearly demonstrated.

Energy is an important underpinning to our economic,industrial and military strength, and thus to our national security. Over the long term, our national energy policy is aimed at ensuring adequate suppliesof energy at reasonable prices by strengthening domestic energy industries, diversifying energy sources, and improving energy efficiency. We areworking through the International Energy Agency toassist our allies to develop complementary strategies.More immediate objectives are to reduce the nation'svulnerability to disruptions in foreign energy suppliesand to lessen the impact on the civil economy ifdisruptions should occur. This includes plans for increasing the size of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve,promoting international cooperation with allies andpartners in the International Energy Agency, and encouraging research into economically viable technologies that increase energy efficiency or that makeuse of alternative sources of power.

Internationally, we have led in the coordination ofeconomic policy among the major industrialized countries. In addition, we will continue to assist developing countries to realize sustained, noninflationary growth, since we understand that this is inour mutual economic and security interest. We willencourage an effective adjustment process for debtor nations, supported by adequate private and public financing. To help debtor countries, we have expressedour willingness to negotiate additional resources forthe World Bank. The United States has welcomed aproposed enlargement of the IMF's Structural Adjustment Facility. We also have proposed a broadenedIMF facility to provide a financial cushion forvulnerable developing countries dealing with thevicissitudes of external economic forces.

As noted earlier, our nation's defense edge is based ontechnological, rather than numerical superiority. If welose this edge, we also lose an essential elementof our military deterrent. There is concern that theloss of advanced production capabilities in critical industries could place our defense manufacturing basein jeopardy. We must avoid situations where increased reliance on other countries for advances in critical technologies could, over the long term, turn intovulnerabilities.

Furthermore, the fruits of the free-market economymust not strengthen the military capability of ouradversaries. We, as well as our allies, must continue toensure that economic relationships with the Sovietbloc do not weaken our national security. For example, we have reached agreement on eliminating preferential credit terms to the Soviet Union. Working through the International Energy Agency, we and ourallies have reduced the substantial risk of Western European dependence on Soviet energy. Acting withour allies through the Coordinating Committee forMultilateral Export Controls (COCOM), we are making progress toward ensuring that militarily-sensitive technology does not flow to the Soviet Union and thatcompetitor firms in COCOM member nations bear thesame export restrictions as U.S. firms. We will continue to improve the COCOM review process, to harmonize and tighten national licensing andenforcement procedures, and to encourage greatercooperation with allies and friends. The dual objectives of protecting and sharing militarily significant technologies pose a challenge, one made more difficult by rapid technological changes. But it is achallenge we muSt meet.

We Willingly offer our philosophy of free-market economies to centrally planned regimes. Indeed, it is onlyby adopting market mechanisms that these regimescan satisfy the economic needs and desires of their peoples. However, market economies only flourishwhere freedom and individual rights are encouraged.The IMF, GATT and other international economic institutions are mainly concerned with imprCNing relations among free individuals, businesses and financial institutions. While we note recent Soviet policy statements regarding "reconstruction" and economic reform, the Soviet economic system remains at thispoint fundamentally incompatible with participation infree-world institutions. Policy statements must betranslated into positive actions before such participation can be considered.

u.s. DEFENSE POLICY

A Policy of Deterrence

The third element of U.s. national power is military. Insome cases, the integrated use of the other elementsof national pov.ter will be insufficient to meet thethreats to our security interests. we therefore mustbe-and are-ready to employ military power in coordination with the other elements. However, the ultimate goal when applying military force, or projecting military power, is to encourage political solutions.War is the least desirable alternative, but only bybeing prepared to wage war successfully can we deterit.

America's defense policy throughout the postwar period has been aimed at deterring aggression againstthe United States and its allies. Deterrence works bypersuading potential adversaries that the costs of their aggression will exceed any probable gains. Deterrenceis the basis of our military strategy against conventional as well as nuclear aggression. Because any conflict carries the risk of escalation, our goal is todissuade aggression of any kind.

We seek also to prevent coercion of the United States,its allies, and friends. Successful coercion could give ahostile power the benefits of victory without the costof war. As discussed earlier, the Soviet threat manifests itself not only in the danger of an actual attack, but inthe form of propaganda, intimidation and coercion aswell. The Soviets still seek to dominate Western Europe and Japan without having to fire a shot-acoercive threat which must and will be deterred byour political determination, our defense capabilities,and our alliance relationships.

To deter the Soviet Union, we must make clear to itsleaders that we have the means and the will to respond effectively to coercion or aggression against oursecurity interests. While emphasizing our resolve torespond, our policy is to avoid specifying exactly whatour response will be. This is the essense of ourstrategic doctrine of "flexible response;' which hasbeen United States policy since 1961 and NATOstrategy since 1967. Specifically, our forces deter apotential aggressor by confronting him with threetypes of possible responses from which we would choose at the appropriate time:Direct Defense: To confront an adversary with thepossibility that his aggression will be stopped with-.out our resorting to actions which escalate the conflict. Th is is someti mes referred to as "deterrence through denial:' Defeating a nonnuclear attack withconventional forces only would be an example ofdirect defense.The Threat of Escalation: To warn an adversary thathis aggression could start hostilities that might notbe confined in the manner he hopes or envisionsand that escalation could exact far greater coststhan he anticipates, or could bear. In this regard,ATO's deterrence of a Soviet conventional attack isenhanced by our ability and resolve to use nuclear weapons, if necessary, to halt aggression.The Threat of Retaliation: To raise the prospect thatan attack will trigger a retaliatory attack on the aggressor's homeland, causing his losses far to exceedany possible gains. Our deterrence of a Soviet nuclear attack on the United States is based on ourresolve to retaliate directly against the SovietUnion.

Maintaining Strategic Deterrence

While deterrence requires capabilities across the entire spectrum of conflict, its essential foundation is provided by our strategic nuclear forces and the doctrinewhich supports them. Nuclear deterrence, like anyform of deterrence, requires us to consider not whatwould deter us, but what would deter a potential attacker, particularly one whose perceptions of theworld and value system are substantially different fromour own. Since we can never be entirely certain ofSoviet percepti ns, we must ensure that both theeffectiveness of our strategic forces and our wiII to usethem, if necessary, are never in doubt.

In the interest of ensuring deterrence, the United States maintains diversified strategic retaliatory forcesto hedge against a disarming first strike, to complicate Soviet attack plans, and to guard against technological surprise. To this end we maintain a variety of basingmodes, launch platforms, and attack vehicles, achieving diversity through a triad of submarine launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and bombers. Adequate and survivable command, control and communications areessential to our strategic force structure and critical tothe credibility of our strategic deterrent.

Our strategic forces and the associated targeting policymust, by any calculation, be perceived as making nuclear warfare a totally unacceptable and unrewardingproposition for the Soviet leadership. Accordingly, ourtargeting policy:Denies the Soviets the ability to achieve essential military objectives by holding at risk Soviet warmaking capabilities, including both the full range ofSoviet military forces and the war-supporting industry which provides the foundation for Soviet military power and supports its capability to conduct a protracted conflict; andPlaces at risk those political entities the Soviet leadership values most: the mechanisms for ensuring survival of the Communist Party and its leadership cadres, and for retention of the Party's controlover the Soviet and Soviet-bloc peoples.

This basic policy of targeting those assets which areessential to Soviet warmaking capability and political control has been an integral part of U.S. strategy formany years. In implementing this policy, the United States does not target population as an objective initself and seeks to minimize collateral damage throughmore accurate, lower yield weapons.

Hold ing at risk the full range of Soviet assets isnecessary for an effective deterrent, but is not sufficient. As President, I cannot be limited to the optionsof capitulation or massive mutual destruction in response to aggression. We must have flexibility in theemployment of our strategic forces. For ou r deterrentto be credible, it must be clear to the Soviets that theUnited States has military options appropriate to abroad range of plausible situations.

Finally, the United States requires sufficient residual capability to provide leverage for early war termination, and to avoid coercion in a post-conflict world.For this reason, we maintain a nuclear reserve force asan integral part of our strategic forces. In addition, wemaintain Continuity of Government programs to ensure the Soviets cannot escape retaliation by initiatinga quick, "decapitating" attack aimed at incapacitatingour political and military leadership. Our civil defense program also contributes to the Nation's preparednessin the event of an attack.These capabilities do not imply that we seek theability to fight a nuclear war. I have repeatedly emphasized that a nuclear war cannot be won and mustnever be fought. But we must deter an adversary whohas a very different strategic outlook from our ~'Vnan outlook which continues to place great stress onnuclear warfighting capability. It is essential the$oIiets understand that they cannot gain their objectives through nuclear warfare, or nuclear coercion,under any conceivable circumstances.

Our policy of flexible response and deterrence through the threat of offensive retaliation haspreserved the security of the United States and itsallies for decades. Looking to the future, the Strategic Defense Initiative offers an opportunity to shift deterrence to a safer and more stable basis through greaterreliance on strategic defenses. Such defenses, which threaten no one, would enhance deterrence by injecting greater uncertainties into Soviet estimates of their ability to achieve their military objectives should theyattempt a first strike. Even less than perfect defensecould increase stability by denying the Soviets confidence that they could achieve meaningful militarygoals, thereby eliminating incentives for a Soviet first strike. In judging the suitability of systems for possible deployment, we will continue to be guided by the criteria of military effectiveness, survivability, and costeffectiveness at the margin.

By reducing the military value of ballistic missiles,strategic defenses would facilitate Soviet acceptance ofsignificant arms reduction agreements. In a world withfewer ballistic missiles, however, Soviet incentives tonot abide by such agreements would be greater.Strategic defense can effectively negate such incentivesby eliminating the utility of covertly stockpiled missiles. Thus enhanced strategic defenses offer theprospect of a safer, more stable world in which deepreductions in strategic offensive arms are bothnegotiable and enforceable. We will continue to try topersuade the Soviets to join with us in working out astable transition to this desirable goal.

Continuing the modernization of our strategic forces isessential to assure reliable deterrence, enhance stability, and provide motivation for the Soviets to negotiatebroad, deep, equitable and verifiable reductions instrategic offensive arms. While "'e are firmly committed to using arms reductions as one component of ourpolicy for enhancing U.S. and allied security, successin arms negotiations does not alter the need formodern, effective, survivable nuclear forces to provide deterrence, promote stability, and hedge against Soviet cheating or abrogation. Nor does it eliminate the needfor a nuclear weapons produdion complex capable ofsupporting such weapons in the future. Neglectingmodernization in expectation of arms reduction agreements would actually decrease the likelihood ofsuch agreements by reducing Soviet incentives tonegotiate.

For their part, the Soviets continue to invest heavily inaccurate, fast-flying ballistic missiles which can destroyhard targets. Their goal has been, and remains, an effective disarming first-strike capability. Moreover, theyare continuing to enhance their ICBM survivability through silo hardening and mobility, including deployment of the road-mobile S5-25 and the rail-basedS5-24. At the same time, they invest roughly the sameamount in their strategic defense programs as in their offensive force modernization. They are expandingand imprc:wing the world's only deployed anti-ballistic missile (ABM) system, violating the ABM Treaty withconstruction of their radar at Krasnoyarsk and otherradar deployments, and increasing their capability todeplOy a territorial ABM defense. Their vast growing network of deep underground leadership shelters isaimed at ensuring the survival of Communist Party control over the Soviet nalion, economy, and military forces in war. Their strategic communications arehighly redundant, survivable, and hardened against nuclear effects.

In response to the buildup of Soviet capabilities, theUnited States is continuing the Strategic Modernization Program in order to maintain the essential survivability and mission-effectiveness of our O'>Nn forces.The Soviets' active and passive defenses, their buildupof offensive forces, and their published doctrine allcontinue to provide evidence of Soviet nuclear warfighting mentality, and underline the essentiality ofmaintaining an effective US deterrent through supportfor this highest priority defense program.

Arms Reductions

Arms control is not an end in itself, but only one ofseveral tools to enhance our national security. Ourarms reductions objectj~s are fully integrated withour national security policies to enhance deterrence,reduce risk, support alliance relationships, and ensurethe Soviets do not gain significant unilateral advantage.

Based on this view of arms control as a complementto a strong national defense posture, we have beenguided since the beginning of this Administration byseveral fundamental principles:The United States seeks only those agreementswhich contribute to our security and that of ourallies.The United Stales seeks agreements which reducearms, not simply limit their increase.Achieving verifiable agreements on broad, deepand equitable reductions in offensive nuclear armsis the highest arms control priority of the United States.Within the category of offensive nuclear arms, theUnited Stales gives priority 10 reducing the mostdestabilizing weapons: fast-flying, non-recallableballistic missiles.The United States also seeks equitable arms control measures in the area of nuclear testing, chemical weapons and conventional forces.The United States insists on agreements that can beeffectively verified and fully complied with. Armscontrol agreements without effective verification measures are worse than no agreements at all, asthey create the possibility of Soviet unilateral advantage, and can affect u.s. and allied planningwith a false sense of confidence.

Our perseverance in adhering to these principles paidoff on December 8, 1987, when Soviet General Secretary Gorbachev and I signed a treaty onIntermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) eliminatingall U.s. and Soviet ground-launched ballistic andcruise missiles and their launchers, with rangesbetweenand 5,500 kilometers. The INF agreement is an important tribute to NATO solidarity, persistence, and political courage.

The Soviet Union, because of its massive buildup, isrequired by the treaty to eliminate an INF missileforce capable of carrying four times as many warheadsas the United States. Thus, the treaty establishes theimportant principle of asymmetry in arms reduction agreements, to compensate for large Soviet quantitative advantages. It is noteworthy that the systemsthe Soviets must eliminate are primarily based withinthe Soviet Union, where they are not particularly vulnerable to conventional attack in a possible NATO Warsaw Pact conflict. In contrast, the U.s. systems tobe eliminated are high priority targets for Soviet conventional attack. Finally, the Soviet systems eliminated,particularly the shorter-range INF missiles, havechemical and conventional as well as nuclear capabilities, and could be employed against NATObases and forces during non-nuclear phases of aNATO-Warsaw Pact conflict.

The military benefits of the INF Treaty will be evengreater if we succeed in negotiating a treaty on strategic arms reductions. An agreement which significantly reduces strategic systems will lessen Soviet capabilityfor a first strike, inhibit their ability to use intercontinental weapons against theater targets, and substantially increase the Soviets' uncertainty ofaccomplishing their political ends through militarymeans.

While reducing the Soviet threat, the INF treaty doesnot alter NATO's basic approach to deterrence. NATO'sstrategy of flexible response continues to demand astrong allied nuclear capability. Fears that an INFagreement will somehow decouple the defense ofEurope from the u.s. nuclear arsenal are based onfundamental misunderstandings of the US commitment and capability to participate in the defense ofEurope. The United States retains substantial nuclear capabilities in Europe to counter Warsaw Pact conventional superiority, and to serve as a link to U.S.strategic nuclear forces. NATO aircraft will continue tohave the capability to hold at risk a broad range oftargets, including those within the Soviet homeland. Inaddition, U.s. sea-based forces assigned to NATO willcontinue to provide Alliance authorities with a comparable targeting capability. Thus, the 'Soviets can beunder no illusion that they could attack NATO without placing their own territory at risk.

Eliminating an entire class of ground-launched missiles, while an achievement of historical propor~tions, does not remove the large Soviet conventionaland chemical threat to Europe. The next NATO priority for arms control, therefore, is to redress existing imbalances in conventional and chemical warfare capabilities which favor the Soviet Union. Recognizing this, the Alliance Foreign Ministers meeting inReykjavik, Iceland in June 1987 called for a coherentand comprehensive concept of arms control which reduces remaining European-based nuclear forces onlyin conjunction with the establishment of a conventional balance, and the global elimination of chemical weapons. I fully support this approach.The most important unfinished arms control task is toachieve deep reductions in strategic offensive arms.Both we and the Soviets have introduced draft texts forstrategic arms reduction treaties (START). Our approach provides for specific restrictions on the mostdestabilizing systems-fast-flying ballistic missiles,especially heavy Soviet ICBMs. We are pursuing agoal first agreed to in October 1986 and reaffirmed during the December 1987 Summit: a 50 percent reduction in strategic offensive forces to a total of6,000 warheads and 1,600 delivery vehicles. We arenegotiating seriously; if the Soviets are willing tomatch our seriousness, agreement is possible. At thesame time, a bad agreement is worse than no agreement, and we will not accept any agreement whichdoes not enhance our security.

We are also engaged in a wide variety of armsnegotiations and discussions on other subjects. TheU.s. approach to all of these areas is consistent; weseek only those agreements which are equitable,verifiable, and will enhance our security and that ofour allies.Specifically:Consistent with our belief that strategic defensesmay offer a safer, more stable basis for deterrence,we seek Soviet agreement for an orderly transitionto a more defense-reliant world.We seek an effective and verifiable global ban onchemical weapons.We seek alliance-to-alliance negotiations toestablish a more secure and stable balance in conventional forces at lower levels from the Atlantic tothe Urals. Any steps ultimately taken in this areamust be effectively verifiable and must recognizethe geographic and force asymmetries between thetwo sides. Alliance policy in this regard, which wefully support, is quite clear-increased security andstabi Iity, not reductions per se, are the objectives ofWestern conventional arms control efforts. Giventhe Warsaw Pact's conventional superiority in certain key areas-particularly those important for offensive operations-even modest reductions inNATO forces, in the "absence of larger reductionsfrom the Warsaw Pact, would reduce NATO'ssecurity and would not promote stability. Thechallenge is to synchronize NATO's force improvement plans and conventional arms control efforts toward the long-term goals of increased security andstability.In the area of nuclear testing, on November 9, 1987,we began formal negotiations with the Soviets onessential verification improvements to permit ratification of existing treaties: the Threshold TestBan Treaty, and the Peaceful Nuclear ExplosionTreaty. Once our verification concerns have beensatisfied and the treaties ratified, we would beprepared immediately to engage in negotiationswith the Soviets on ways to implement a step-bystep program to limit and ultimately end nuclear testing, in association with a program to reduce andultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons. Until thatultimate stage has been reached, however, thUnited States must continue testing to maintain asafe and reliable deterrent.Finally, we seek to enhance stability through improved measures which c uld prevent misunderstanding. To this end, we signed an agreement withthe Soviets on S ptember 15, 1987, to e tablishNuclear Risk Reduction Centers in each national capital as a mechanism to avoid incidents resultingfrom accident or miscalculation during peri ds oftension.

In all of these areas we consider effective verification provisions to be as important as specific negotiated limits; they must be negotiated concurrently. We cannot accept obligations that limit our military programs unless we can effectively verify Soviet compliancewith those same obligations. This is particularly important in light of the continuing pattern of Soviet violations documented in the several rrports which Ihave submitted to the Congress on Soviet noncompliance.

We have made solid progress in the area of armsreductions. Sound agreements-tho e that enhance oursecurity and that of our Allies-require patience, firmness and strength. If we continue to display these qualities, and if the Soviets are willing to build on theprogress we have made, arms reductions can helpkeep us on the path toward greater sta ility and asafer world. In moving to that world, I will maintainmy commitment to broad, deep, equitable, andverifiable arms reductions, focused especially onballistic missiles, and my equally strong commitmentto the Strategic Defense Initiative.

17

Maintaining ConventionalDeterrenceModern strategic nuclear capabilities are essential fordeterrence, but they alone are obviously not enough.The United States and its allies require robustconv ntional forces, backed by adequate theater nuclear capabilities, as an integral part of our overall deterrent. As noted earl ier,ational Security Strategy has historically been based on the conceptsof forward defense and alliance solidarity. Consistentwith that strategy, we maintain large, forward deployed forces at sea and on the territory of ourATO and Asian allies in time of peace. The overallsize, capabilities, and characteristics of U.s. Armed Forces are strongly influenced by the need tomaintain such presence, which is essential to deteraggression.

u.s.

The most demanding threat with which those forcesmust deal is, of course, the Soviet Union. Soviet forceswill always outnumber our own in any presentlyfor seeable conflict-parti ularly when viewed interms of active forces and major items of combat equipment. For this reason we must continue to givethe most careful a ention to ensuring our forces'technological superiority and high readiness toaccomplish their deterrent and warfighting missions.An additional premi e of American defense policy isthat the United State does not seek to deal with thethreat from the Soviet Union unaided. A system of vigorous alliances is essential to deterrence; and themost important of these is NATO. The United States contributes to the NATO deterrent in several ways.Most visible is the peacetime stationing of over300,000 military personnel in the Alliance area. Thissignifi an presence of U.S. forces makes it clear that itis not ossible to attack a NATO ally without simultaneously engaging the full military might of theUnited States. The proximity of major Warsaw Pactground, air and naval forces to Alliance territory, thespeed with which modern conflict can unfold, thePact's significant numerical advantages, and theSoviets' strong doctrinal emphasis on surprise, allargue for the continuation of substantial, qualitatiyelyadvanced U.S. and allied conventional forces inEurope.In addition to the direct provision of forces, theUn ited States provides security assistance to thoseNATO allies whose economies do not permit them to

18

make as great a contribution to the common defenseas we and they would wish; and we encourage themore affluent Alliance members to'do so as well.Such assistance serves as an important force multiplier-increasing both the political solidarity andthe military effectiveness of ATO.Under ATO military strategy, the land-based forces ofthe Alliance nations, including the United States,would have primary responsibility for blunting aWarsaw Pact attack and defending Allied territory,while simultaneously disrupting and destroying thefollow-on forces which Soviet strategy relies upon toexploit any initial successes. Allied ground forces,supported by tactical air power, require the capabilityto halt a Pact attack and restore the integrity ofAlliance territory if NATO political and military objectives are to be achieved. Absent such capability,Alliance strategy becomes heavily dependent on thethreat of resorting to nuclear weapons to achieve essential deterrence and warfighting objectives.The capability needed to halt such a Warsaw Pactattack, without risking an early transition to nuclearwar, is the principal determinant of the size andcomposition of the more than 300,000 military personnel we currently have forward deployed inEurope. In collaboration with our allies, U.s. military planners consider the Pact's capabi Iities, the battle terrain, allied capabilities, and ATO strategy whendetermining the size, composition, and location of ourcontribution of forward deployed forces along the 720kilometer Central front, and on the flanks andadjoining seas.In addition, certain U.s. forces perform functions forthe theater that are not withi n the capabil ity of ourallies, such as certain types of reconnaissance andintelligence missions; or they provide the capability toreceive and rapidly deploy reinforcements andresupply received from the United States. While marginal changes may be feasible in the future, withadjustments in the U.s.-allied division of labor, thebasic U.s. contribution has been carefully planned toassure that the strategy for the defense of Western Europe, and the U.S. contribution to it, are militarily effective, and are seen by our adversaries to be so.In addition to the right numbers and mix of units, U.s.and allied forces require constant upgrading andmodernization to retain a qualitative edge in the faceof the Pact's superior numbers and rapidly improving

technologies. Our policies relating to force modernization and retention of our technological edge emphasize cooperation among the Allies on research,development, and production. This approach reducesduplication of R&D resources, shares the bestavai lable allied technology, promotes interoperableequipment, and provides incentives for our Alii s toincrease their contribution to Alliance capabilities.Congressional initiatives aimed at stimulating cooperative R&D have aided materially in advancingthese programs.ATO's strategy of flexible response requires acapability for Allian e reaction appropriate to thenature of Soviet provocation. In addition to conventional forces, this strategy must be upported by effective and substantial theater nuclear forces. In contrastto the policy of the Soviet Union, it is ATO's policyto maintain theater nuclear forces at the low st level capable of deterring the threat. In pursuit of thispolicy, the Alliance decided in October 1983 toreduce the number of warheads in Europe. These reductions, taken independently of any arms reduction agreement, decreased NATO's nuclear stockpile inEurope to the lowest level in over 20 year. Thismakes it essential that the remaining stockpile bemodern, survivable, and ffective.With the prospective removal of our INF for e inEurope, it will be particularly important that our remaining theater nu lear forces b fully capable ofsupporting the Allian e's flexibl response strategy. Wehave examined the military implications of the treatyfrom that standpoint and are confident that theresulting force structure will provide the n cessarymilitary capability, provided that necessary force modernization continues and that we effectively capitalize on available nuclear weapons delivery platforms.While neither NATO nor the United tates seeks tomatch the Soviets weapon for weapon, deterrencewould be dangerously weakened if the Soviets wereallowed to field a major capability hich was completely unmatched by a countervailing NATcapability. This premise underlies our determinationto modernize U.s. chemical weapons capability through development of modern, safe, binary munitions. This modernization will provide us the capability needed to deter Soviet first use of chemical weapons. Absent such capability, we will remain

dependent on a stockpile of obsolescent chemical weapons ill-suite to modern delivery systems. Thisplaces undue r liance on Alliance nuclear capabilitiesof chemical weapons-an obto deter Soviet firstviously undesirable and risky situation.U.s. strategy recogniz s that the Soviet Union iscapable of simultan ous aggression in more than oneregion. Should aggression occur in s eral areas simultaneously, U.s. responses ould be governed byexisting commitments, general strategic priorities, thespecific dr umstances at hand, and the availability offorces. Our strategy is not to try to fight "everywhereat on :' We would do what is strategically sensibleand perationally achievable under the circumstances.Our capability to respond would be enhanc d by theflexibility we have built into our ~ rce structure, including capabilities for global strategi mobility andpower proj ction. This visible capability to respond effectively in distant theaters reduces the risk that wewill ever have to m et such attacks.ATO is not our only alliance. The United States hasbilateral or multilateral security commitments withsome 43 n tions r und th globe, including important treati s with J p n, the Republic of Korea, andAustralia.In support of tho commitments, and to deter adventuri m by the Soviets and their client states, we maintain forward deployed forces in other regions ofstrategic importan . Our naval forces deployed in thePacific and Indian Oc ans assist in protecting ourgrowing strategic and economic interests, and supporting allies and fri nds, in Asia and the Pacific.Substantial ground and air force are depl yed inKorea to complement forces of the Republic of Koreain deterring aggression from the North. Naval andtactical air forces deployed throughout the Pacific assist in me ting our security commitments to suchnations as Japan and the Philippines.These global forward d ployed forces serve several functions. They are essential to the creation ofregional power balanwhich deter Soviet aggression and promote overall regional stability. They support th political indep ndence of nations on theSoviet periphery, hence are key to the fundamental security objective of avoiding Soviet dominationof the Eurasian landmass. Finally, they provide animmediately available capability to deal with lessermilitary contingencies. However, for military contingencies not involving the Soviet Union, we lookprimarily to the nations involved to provide for theirown defense.In th past seven years we have made substantial progress in improving the cap bility of our forward deployed forces to protect U.S. interests, execute ourmilitary strategy, and support alliance commitments.We remain firmly committed to continued improvement in our deployed capabilities in support of ourforward-defense, alliance-based strategy. The following paragraphs will discuss selected capabilities which provide essential foundations for that strategy. Maintenance of Global Support and MobilityCapa i1ities.The ability to reinforce and resupply forward deployed forces is essential to the execution of U.S. military strategy. A credible U.s. capability to reinforce ATOrapidly during times of tension, for example, is criticalto effective deterrence.The Soviets have a natural geographic advantage inmilitary operation on the Eurasian rim, a d growing capabilities to launch simultane us offensives inEurope, Southwest Asia and the Far East. Capitalizingon interior lines of communication, they can redeployand resupply forces ov r a broad geographic range.Recent Soviet effort have significantly improved military access by rail and road to strategically important areas along the USSR's southern frontiers.Our global support and mobility capabilities, including airlift, sealift, and prepositioning, are therefore essential to allow us to meet military challenges around the periphery of the Eurasian continent, which remains the primary locus of Soviet expansionist interests. Prepositioning ashore or at sea can sharply reduce our response times. Airlift, the quickest andmost flexible of our mobility assets, would deliver initial reinforcements in most contingencies, but sealiftwill inevitably carry the bulk of our reinforcement andresupply, as it has in past crises. Mobility capabilitiesare especially critical to our strategy for dealing withcontingencies in Southwest Asia, where we have nomilitary bases or permanently stationed military forces.

 Maintenance of an Adequate Logistics Base.maintain a strong conventional deterrent, it is vitalthat we provide adequate logistic support for U.s.forces. A robus logistics infrastructure strengthens deterrence by demonstra ing our preparations forhostilities at any level of intensity, and for the I ngthof time necessary to defend U.S. interests. Adequate,sustained support helps raise the nuclear thresholdand improves prospects for early success in conflict.Adversaries must not conclude that u.s. and allied capabilities would be exhausted if confronted with acomplex or prolonged military campaign. With thesupport of Congress we will seek continued improvement in this unglamorous but essential component ofmilitary power. Concurr ntly, we w'n continue toemphasize to our allies that the sustainment of their forces in combat must parallel that of our own. Maintenance of Adequate Active Forces.Support of our conventional deterr nt requires that wemaintain balanc d and effective active duty forcessufficien in quality an quantity to make our national military strategy credible. In the context of ouralliance relationships, deterring and, if necessarydef ating, the Sovi threat requires a carefullystructur d mix of u.s. and allied land and sea-based forces capable of executi ng the agreed strategy unti Ireinforced from the re pective national mobilizationases.While requirements are the primary focus ofour ground forces' concern, the global nature ofpotential threats to u.s. interests requires maintenanceof flexible and diverse ground forces capable of rapid deployment to, and sustained operations in otherareas of strategic importance as well. This has led theArmy to establish rapidly deployable light divisions,while continuing efforts have gone into the enhancement of Marine Corps capabilities and amphibious lift.U.s. tactical airpower supports the achievement oftheater campaign goals by maintaining battlefield airuperiority, providing responsive and effective firepower for ground combat units, and conductingdeep interdiction of enemy forces, command and control facilities, and sources of logistics support. In addition, in the European theater, it plays a critical role inassuring the essential reinforcement and resupply ofu.s. forward deployed forces by protecting port

facilities, aerial ports of debarkation, prepositionedequipment and munitions, and lines of communication. The capability of air forces to deploy rapidly incrises adds to our ability to bring effective militarypower to bear in distant regions in contingencies.Maritime forces also playa unique role in supportingour national military strategy. Given the realities of ourgeostrategic position, fronting on two oceans,maritime superiority over any potential adversary isessential to support our alliance relationships and forward deployed forces. The capability of Navy andMarine Corps forces to project and sustain militarypower in areas distant from our shores is of particular importance, given the central position of the SovietUnion on the Eurasian land mass and the fact thatmany of the United States' most important allies arelocated on the Eurasian periphery, accessible from thesea.Our naval power projection forces would also playamajor role in any Southwest Asia contingency. T eircurrent presence in the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea,together with Army and Air Force units, is providing essential support for several important national security objectives.

Maintaining a National Mobilization BaseThe effective mobilization of manpower and industrial resources in the event of a conflict would provide essential support for our military capabilities. Realistic mobilization plans also provide a clear means for theUnited States to communicate its resolve to ourpotential adversaries in eriods of tension or crisis.On the industrial side, the maintenance of a broad,technologically superior mobilization base is adefense policy. As Ifundamental element ofnoted when discussing the economic elements ofpower, we rely on the size and strength of the U.S.economy as our ultimate line of defense. And, asnuclear weapons red~ctions are negotiated, thecapability of theand allied mobilization bases rapidly to generate additional conventional military forces and the supplies and equipment to sustainthem, becomes increasingly important. Maintenanceof this capability supports deterrence and provides theability for a timely and flexible response to the fullrange of plausible threats.Defense industrial mobilization policies focus on stepsthat industry and government can take during peacetime and in the early stages of a crisis to acquirelong-lead time items and to prepare for surge production. Examples of current mobilization plans include those providing for surge production ofprecision-guided munitions; for the adaptation of newproduction technologies such as flexible manufacturing systems; and for the expand dproduction of machine tools.To ensure that our industrial base can respond in anadequate and timely fashion to a broad range ofpotential emergencies, we are testing a new conceptof industrial mobilization responses linked to early warning indicators. Under this concept, the readinessof our industrial base would be progressively increased as intelligence suggested an increasingprobabi lity of hostile actions directed against U.S.interests. To support this concept, in peacetime planners will identify and catalog relevant industrialbase capabilities, prepare sp cific response options,and create a series of graduated responses to eimplemented within exi ting capabilities at a time ofcrisis.Such mobilization planning cannot be done on apurely unilateral basis. In the NATO context,international collaboration to improve national mobilization capabilities is important to increase Alliance-wide efficiency and the capability to supportwar plans. For example, the United States through itsrepresentation on the NATO Industrial Planning Committee, works closely with its allies to ensure thatmember nations are prepared to support the Allian estrategy with a coordinated and effective industrial mobilization response.With regard to manpower, our mobilization plans emphasize achievable increases in defense manpowerat a pace consistent with military needs. Underexisting plans, active forces-depending on their location-would either maintain their forward deployment or rapidly reinforce such deploymentsfrom the United States. Reserve forces would mobilize, some military retirees would be recalled,and civilian manpower would be expanded to supportsuch necessary defense functions as logistics, communications, and health services.

 Expanding human presence and activity beyondEarth orbit into the solar system.

Our plans for military manpower mobilization are based upon the Total Force policy, established in the early 1970s, which places increased responsibilities onthe reserve component of U.S. forces. With fully 50percent of the combat units for land warfare in thereserve compon nts, their importance to our conventional deterrent cannot be overstated. Their priority formanning, training and equipment mobilization isbased on time-phasing of their use in operationalplans. In many cases, the sequence of deploymentwould place reserve component units ide by sidewith, and sometimes even ahead of, the active dutyforces. While there are pecific mission areas in whichthe role for reserve components can be expanded, weneed to exercise care to avoid fundamentally alteringthe nature of service in the reserves, or imbalance thereserve/active force mix. While not reserves in theconventional sense of the term, in time of war CoastGuard forces would provide an important augmentation to our worldwide naval capabilities.

The use of space systems to satisfy many critical national security requirements is an expanding and vital element of U.s. national power. Functions important toour national security strategy such as communications,navigation, environmental monitoring, early warning,surveillance, and treaty verification are increasingly performed by space systems. In many cases, theworldwide access provided by the space systemsmakes them the only available means for accomplishing these important functions. Absent theassured use of space, our nation's security would beseriously jeopardized.

SUPPORTING POLICIESU.S. National Space PolicyI recently approved a new national space policywhich updates and expands guidelines for the conduct of U.s. national security, civil, and commercial efforts in space. The p !icy recognizes that a fundamental objective guiding U.S. activities continues tobe space leadership, which requires preeminence inkey areas critical to achieving our broad goals. Thesegoals include: Strengthening the security of the United States. Obtaining economic, technological and scientific benefits that improve the quality of life on earth,through space-related activities. Encouraging U.S. private sector investment in spaceand space-related activities. Promoting international cooperative activitis, takinginto account U.s. national security, foreign policy,scientific, and economic interests. Cooperating with other nations in maintaining freedom of space for activities that enhance thesecurity and welfare of mankind.

Our military policy for space encompasses fiveelements.First, we recognize that deterrence-at all levels ofpotential conflict-cannot be accomplished withoutspace-based assets, so we seek to ensure that criticalspace systems will be available to commanders, commensurate with their need.Second, we seek to ensure free access to space for allnations, in a manner analogous to the way that freeaccess to the earth's oceans is maintained.Third, we encourage interaction among national security, civil government and, where appropriate,commercial space programs to share critical technologies and avoid unnecessary duplication of activities.Fourth, our policies provide for improved defensive capabilities in the future, deterring or, if necessary,defending against enemy attacks on our space systems.Finally, we will continue to improve those space systems that directly support our military forces byenhanci ng thei r effectiveness.Our civil space activities contribute to the nation'sscientific, technological, and economic well-being inaddition to making a major contribution to America'sprestige and leadership in the world. Our civil spacegoals are: To advance scientific knowledge of the planet Earth,the solar system, and the universe beyond. To preserve our preeminence in critical aspects ofspace science, space applications, space technology,and manned space flight. To open new opportunities for use of the space environment. To develop selected civil applications of space technology. To engage in international cooperative efforts thatfurther U.S. space goals. To establish a permanently manned presence inspace.u.s. leadershi p in civi lian space programs has beentaken for granted since the late 1960s. That leadership,however, is being increasingly challenged both by ourfriends and allies abroad, and by the Soviet Union.The ambitious program of space exploration andresearch that the Soviets are pursuing, centered upona high level of launch capacity and the Mir Space Station, have eroded traditional areas of U.s. space leadership. Initiatives-such as efforts to improve ourspace transportation systems, develop and deploy theSpace Station, and develop the technologies tosupport a range of futu re solar system exploration options-are intended to ensure U.S. preeminence inareas critical to our national interests.The Uni ted States is first among nations in its effortsto foster a purely commercial, market-driven space industry without direct government subsidies. Webel ieve that private sector space initiatives will havepositive effects on the U.s. balance of trade, workforce skills, and the development of unique manufacturing methods and products. These initiatives alsopromise lower costs to the taxpayer and enhanced security to our nation. We are confident that traditional American ingenuity will yield innovative space technology applications comparable to, or exceeding,those achieved in aviation earl ier th is centu ry.

U.S. Intelligence Policy Development and execution of sound national security policies, and the strategies applicable to specific situations, requires timely, accurate, and thorough information regarding actual or potential threats to ournational security. Early warning of developmentswhich could place at risk u.s. interests is vital if weare to employ the relevant elements of national powerin a timely way and deal with threats before theybecome unmanageable, or entail the risk of conflict.The primary goal of U.S. intelligence activities is toprovide appropriate agencies of government with thebest available information on which to base decisions concerning the development and conduct of foreign,economic and defense policy.It is axiomatic that our National Security Strategy mustbe strongly supported by reliable intelligenceconcerni ng potential adversaries' national capabil itiesand probable courses of action. Intelligence alsoprovides essential insights into how we are viewed bythose adversaries. Their perceptions of our capabilities,political will, national interests, and likely reaction tohostile provocation, provide an important measure ofthe effectiveness of our strategy. The collection of suchinformation is a priority objective of our intelligence activities. It must be pursued in a vigorous, innovative,and responsible manner that is consistent withapplicable law and respectful of the principles uponwhich this nation was founded.The capability to deal with the hostile intelligence threat to the United States is equally important. Thelarge and active intelligen e services of the SovietUnion, its clients and surrogates, conduct sophisticated collection and analysis operations targeted against us, our allies, and friends. The Sovietsrely heavily on espionage and an elaborate apparatusfor illegal acquisition of Western military technologyto further thei r strategic ai ms. The apprehension overthe past few years of spies conducting highly damaging espionage operations against the United States hasdramatically underli ned the severity of the threat. Ihave directed that the U.s. intelligence communitygive special emphasis to detecting and countering espionage and other threats from foreign intelligence services.International terrorism and narcotics trafficking, particularly when state-supported, can threaten thesecurity of the U.s. and our citizens. Intelligenceplays a critical role in our efforts to control andreduce these threats. Intell igence collection andspecial operations by agencies of the u.s. governmentto protect against international terrorism and international narcotics activities will remain a high priority.

The ability to conduct covert action operations is anessential elemen of our national security capability.In selected circumstanc s such operations provide ameans to deal with developing threats to our security before the employment of u.s. military power orother actions entailing higher costs and risks are required. Over the past year, we have reviewed all existing covert action programs to ensure that they arein accordance with applicable law and consistent withU.s. policy. We have also put into place proceduresfor approval, review and congressional notification ofnew covert action operations to ensure that suchoperations receive appropriate interagency review, andare consistent with applicable law. Additionally, wehave instituted stricter accountability of access toprotect confidentiality, and have established "sunset provisions" that require annual review of all covert action programs, and their continuation only byPresidential approval. We wi II conti nue to employsuch covert action operations in support of national security objectives, and ensure that they are consistently supportive of national policy.I~ Integrating Elements of Power into National Security Strategy

STRATEGY FOR THE WESTERN HEMISPHEREOur own territorial security is inextricably linked withthe security of our hemispheric neighbors, north andsouth; the defense of North America is the nation'smost fundamental security concern. We sometimes failfully to appreciate the great strategic importance ofthe Latin American and Caribbean regions, in spite oftheir proximity to our borders and importance to ournational security. The significance of these regions has been lost to Soviet planners, however, who refer toLatin America and the Caribbean as our "strategicrear:" The USSR has, since the early 19605,increasingly sought to expand its influence in theseareas to the detriment of our (MIn security. Ournational interests, as well as our political principles,have led us to promote democracy and economic progress throughout the hemisphere. In the past, wehave relied on a hemispheric security system composed of a strong U.s. deterrent, broadly-based cooperation with Canada, and collective security arrangements with latin America. More recently wehave built on this foundation a policy aimed atstrengthening the ability of our Central American andCaribbean neighbors to resist outside aggression andsubversion, and facilitating the transition to democracyin the region. Today 28 of 33 countries in latinAmerica and the Caribbean, with over 90 percent ofthe population, are democratic. As we work for furtherconsolidation of democr~cy, we continue to promote economic cooperation whh our Hemispheric neighbors.

We remain deeply committed to the interdependent,regional objectives of democracy and freedom, peace,and economic progress. To achieve these, we mustcounter the threat of Soviet expansionist policies notonly from Cuba, but now from Nicaragua. Critical national security interests in latin America are basedon long-standing U.S. policy that there be no Soviet,Cuban, or other Communist bloc beachhead on themainland of the Western Hemisphere, or any countrythat upsets the regional balance and poses a serious military threat to its neighbors. Representative democracy in Nicaragua is a key goal in our strategyto achieve lasting peace and our other interdependent security objectives for the hemisphere.We support the Guatemala Peace Accords andwelcome the initial steps taken by the Sandinistas inthe direction of a freer, more democratic andpluralistic Nicaragua, as agreed to in the Accords. Yetwe have reason to remain skeptical. It is too soon totell if the Sandinista leaders will comply with thepledges they have made. The Sandinistas have madesimilar promises in the past-including in 1979 to theOrganization of American States-which were broken.It is important to keep in mind, however, that even ifthe Nicaraguan government should live up to itsobligations under the Guatemala Peace Accords in fulland credible fashion, security concerns affecting important U.s. interests would remain. They includethe Soviet and Cuban military presence in Nicaragua,and the rapid growth of the Nicaraguan military capability which threatens the military balance of theregion as well as Nicaragua's democratic neighbors.To encourage the Sandinistas to implement the agreed reforms in good faith, and to advance U.s. security interests in Central America, we have engaged inextensive and close consultation with the Central America democracies and the Nicaraguan Resistance.One key element of our diplomatic strategy is thepressure exerted on the Sandinista regime by the Nicaraguan Resistance. We will continue funding the Resistance until we see viden e that democratization inNicaragua is r al and irreversible. Accordingly, theAdministration will request renewed assistance for theFreedom Fighters early this year. Economic and trade sanctions are other key elements of our coordinated strategy.Currently we are deeply involved in the struggle throughout Latin America against the menace of drugproduction and trafficking, which pose thre ts notonly to the integrity and stability of gov rnments toour South, but to the social fabric of the United States itself. Working bilaterally, and wh rever possible on aregional basis, we ar supplying resource andexpertise to the governments wishing to engage withus in this priority effort.Increased trade among the Western Hemisph recountries is also an important element of our national security strategy. Such trade will aid deb or countriesin the region in mana ing their obligation in aresponsible manner while contributing to their economic growth. In addition, th United States supports providing additional resources for the WorldBank and the In ernational Monetary Fund (IMF) toassist these countries in adjusting to the consequencesof external economic forces, such as the d cline ofworld oil and oth r commodity prices.Our close relationship with Canada derives from ourlong historical and cultur I associati n, as well asgeopolitical and economic factors-our physical proximity, the openness of our more than 3,000 mileborder, and our important military cooperation, bothbilaterally and under the ATO aegis. Economically,Canada is by far our largest trading partner. Ourprimary objective with respect to Canada, a close friend and ally, is to protect and strengthen thealready excellent relations we enjoy. In the near-term,our goal can be best achieved by securing approval bythe U.s. Congress and Canadian Parliament of therecently negotiated United States-Canada Free TradeArea agreement. This agreement will benefit bothcountries by removing tariff and non-tariff barriers totrade in goods and services and by facilitating cross border investment by the private sectors of bothcountries.

STRATEGY FOR THE SOVIETUNION AND EASTERNEUROPEAs mentioned earlier, the most significant threat tonational interests remai ns that posed by the Soviet Union. Despite some improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations over the past year, the long-term threat hasnot perceptibly diminished.

The differences between the United States and theSoviet Union are fundamental in nature, given thegreat disparities in our political, economic and social systems, and our divergent geostrategic interests.While the much-publicized reforms of the new Soviet leadership have raised expectations of more benign Soviet policies, there is as yet no evidence that theSoviets have abandon d their long-term objectives.This means that U.s. strategy to counter these objectives must also remain consistent and aimed atthe long-term. We must remain sufficiently flexible toseize the initiative and explore positive shifts in Soviet policy whi h may strengthen U.s. security; but wemust not delude our Ives into believing that theSoviet threat has yet been fundamentally altered, orthat our vigilance can be reduc d.Consis ent with this approach, our overall strategy toward the Soviet Union remains to contain Sovietexpansionism, and to encourage political democracyand basic human rights within the Soviet Union andthe countries under its hegemony. These have beenthe national security objectives of successive U.s.administrations, though the manner of their implementation has varied. Continued emphasis onthe principles of strength, dialogue and realism in ourstrategy may eventually alter Soviet behavior infundamental w ys to create a more stable andpeaceful world.The maintenanc of adequate strength to deter Soviet aggression anywhere in the world that our strategic interests require is central to our strategy. Suchstrength must encompass not only military power, butalso the political determination, vitality of alliancesand the ec nomic health essential to meet our globalresponsibi Iities. In areas where the Soviets arecurrently engaged in military expansionism, such asAfghanistan, the United States is demonstrating itswillingness to support local resistance forces to thedegree necessary to frustrate Soviet ambitions. Ingeneral, our goals are to convince the Soviet Unionthat the use of military force does not pay, and thatthe build-up of military forces beyond levels necessaryfor legitimate national defense will not provideuni lateral advantage.ational strength must be complemented byconstructive dialogue. We have established a four partagenda for discussion with the Soviet Union: armsreduction, human rights, resolution of regional conflicts, and bilateral exchanges. We have made clearthat substantial progress in all areas is necessary toallow a truly qualitative improvement of u.s.-Soviet relations. Our emphasis on human rights is directly relevant to our security strategy because we believethat the manner in which a government treats its ownpeople reflects upon its behavior in the international community of nations.Although progress in U.s.-Soviet relations hashistorically been difficult to predict, present indications are that the Soviet leadership recognizesthat some of the country's past policies must bealtered to prevent further domestic economic andtechnological obsolescence. In this regard, the policiesof the current leadership have a marked strategic castto them, to the extent that they aim at placing theSoviets in a more competitive position vis-a-vis theUnited States over the long term. At the same time,should the Soviets demonstrate that they genuinelywish to improve the U.s.-Soviet relationship byreducing military expenditures and force structure, byterminating Third World subversion and expansion,and by focusing on their internal problems, they willfind the United States welcoming their moreresponsible behavior on the international scene.While acknowledging that most of the countries ofEastern Europe are members of the Warsaw Pact, wehave never recognized Soviet hegemony in the regionas legitimate or healthy because it is based onmilitary power and dictatorship, not democratic consent. We wish to develop our relations with eachcountry of the region on an individual basis. ManyEast European countries at present face severe economic difficulties as a result of forced emulation ofSoviet economic models. The populations of these countries are significantly pro-Western in outlook andwould like to strengthen ties with the Western community of nations. At the same time, theeconomic utility of Eastern Europe to the Soviet Unionis declining.These factors combine to give the United States anopportunity to improve its relations with Eastern European countries. Our objectives in the region areto encourage liberalization and more autonomous foreign policies, and to foster genuine, long-termhuman rights improvements. Our strategy is todifferentiate our policies toward these countries according to their conduct, and to develop relationswith each based on individual merit.The United States and its NATO Allies also areworking jointly to overcome the artificial division ofEurope which occurred after World War II and topromote closer ties between Eastern and Western Europe. This takes place primarily through the35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation inEurope, which serves to maintain pressure on the Soviet Union and Eastern European governments toimprove human rights performance and increases contact and communication between East and West.

STRATEGY FOR WESTERN EUROPE AND NATOThe security of Western Europe is a vital componentof U.S. National Security Strategy. We share acommon heritage and democratic values with Western European countries, have a compelling mutual interestin containing Soviet expansion, and benefit frominterdependent economic relations.Overall, our objectives in Western Europe are to helpmaintain the region's security and independence fromSoviet intimidation, to promote its political andeconomic health, to consult with European governments on effective policies toward the SovietUnion and the Warsaw Pact, and to work with Western Europeans toward overcoming the East-Westdivision of the European continent.

The North Atlantic Alliance embodies thecommitment to Western Europe as well as themembers' commitment to defend each other. AlOhas preserved peace in Europe for almost 40 years, byfar the longest period of peace on the continent inthis century. Through the Alliance, NATO members engage in collective defense to deter Soviet aggressionand enhance security. NATO is, however, both apolitical and military entity. Through NATO, theUnited States also consults with its Western European Allies on a wide range of issues.The cohesion and unity of NATO are essential to asuccessful security strategy relative to the SovietUnion. The repeated and unsuccessful Soviet efforts todrive wedges between the United States and Western Europe testify to the strength of Alliance unity. These Soviet efforts have been thwarted through close andfrequent high-level consultations among allies, tomaintain our solidarity and our common strategy oncrucial issues. The most recent success story of theAlliance has been the conclusion of an IntermediateRange Nuclear Forces (lNF) Treaty between the United States and the Soviet Union. This agreementvindicates NATO's 1979 dual-track decision which,through commitment both to negotiate and to deploy intermediate-range nuclear forces, gave the SovietUnion incentive eventually to agree to the total elimination of this category of weapons. The cohesionof the Alliance and the courage of Allied governmentswhich deployed INf missiles despite sometimes significant domestic resistance has paid off, andresulted in the first agreement in history which willactually reduce nuclear arsenals.The United States, working closely with NATO allies,hopes to reach other successful arms agreements withthe Soviet Union; but we have made clear that thestrategy of flexible response will require thecontinuing presence of US. nuclear weapons, andstrong conventional forces, in Europe. This isparticularly true in view of the great disparity inconventional forces on the continent which directly threatens 'v\'estern Europe. The pronounced conventional force imbalance has been a matter ofconcern for many years. In 1985, the Alliance adoptedan ambitious plan of action designed to remedyNATO's most critical conventional deficiencies.Progress in some areas-such as the provision ofaircraft shelters and the filling of critical munitionshortfalls-has been encouraging, but much moreremains to be accomplished. Within the context ofthese ongoing efforts, the United States will work inclose consultation with our allies toward: Maintenance of the credibility of NATO's nuclear deterrent. We will work toward full implementationof the Montebello agreement, including theprovisions on nuclear modernization, as well assome restructuring of NATO's nuclear forces. Maintenance of a credible conventional deterrentwith emphasis on further execution of Alliance approved conventional defense improvements,including provisions for air defense and increasedsuslainability stocks. More effective use of resources available fordeterrent capabilities Ihrough national defense budgets. We are just beginning to realize a returnon initial efforts in armaments cooperation, and willwork closely with our allies to bring to fruitionother programs recently initiated withCongressionally reserved funds for cooperative research and development. We will also continue tosearch for new opportunities to enhance conventional defense capabilities in resource effective ways, such as improved crisis management procedures and rationalization of roles and missionswith our allies. Improvement of the military use of technology,while strengthening NATO's industrial base,particularly in some countries on NATO's southernflank.Narrowing the gap in conventional capabilities canenhance deterrence, raise the nuclear threshold andreduce the risk of Soviet miscalculation. If also offersthe best hope of inducing the Soviets to negotiate seriously toward a stable conventional equilibrium atlower fOiCe levels.NATO also provides a forum for Western consultationon such political processes as the Conference onSecurity and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), whereour goal is 10 ensure full Soviet and Eastern European implementation of the commitments undertaken in theHelsinki Final Act and Madrid Concluding Document.Of special interest are the CSCE provisions on human rights and the freer flow of peoples and information across the East-West divide. CSCE represents a crucialmeans by which the United States and its Allies areworking to reduce the repression and the artificial barriers which have existed since the Soviet Union imposed its wilt on neighboring countries after WorldWar II.Although the NATO Alliance remains strong andvigorous, aspects of our relationship with Western Europe transcend ATO concerns. These include issues such as trade and protectionism, methods ofdealing with terrorism, and politoward regions outside of the NATO geographic area. We seek towork closely with Western European governments onthese matters, though there are sometimes differing viewpoints as is natural among sovereign, democratic governments.

In the Persian Gulf region, we also pursue aninte rated approach to secure our four long tandingobjectives: maintaining freedom of navigation;strengthening the moderate Arab states; reducing theinfluence of anti-Western powers, such as the SovietUnion and Iran; and assuring access to oil onreasonable term for ourselves and our allies. Iran'scontinuation and escalation of the Iran-Iraq War,including its att mpts to intimidate non-belligerentGulf Arab states, pose the most serious, immediate threat to our interests, and provide the Soviet Unionthe opportunity to a vance it regional agenda.

STRATEGY FOR THE MIDDLE EAST AND SOUTH ASIA

In responding to these threats diplomatically we workpersistently to end the war, both unilaterally-as withOperation Stanch, to ce se the flow of war materiel toIran -and through multilateral forum, such as theUnited Nations ecurity Council. The current challenge is to get Iran to join Iraq in accepting acomprehensive settlement.

De pite the multitude of hanges in the Middl Eastover the past everal decade, u.s. obj ctives haveheld remarkably constant. In harm ny with the predominant aspirati n of th peoples of the region, weremain d eply committed to helping forge a just anlasting peace between Israel and its neighbor. Ourregional goals also include limiting Soviet influen e,fostering the security an prosperity of Israel and ourArab friends, and urbing state-sponsor d terrorism. Toachieve these aims, we must hurdle some eriousobst c1es including continuing, de p-seated ArabIsraeli tensions, the emotionally-charged Palestinianprobl m, radical anti-Western political nd religious movements, the use of terrori m a an instrument ofstate policy, and Soviet polici s which have supportedthe forces of extremism rather than the forces ofmoderati on.In working to overcome these obstacles we pursue astrategy which integrates diplomatic, econ mic andmilitary instruments. With regard to the Arab-Israelipeace process, the u.s. initiative of September 1, 1982remains the cornerstone f our approach. While working diplomatic lIy t narrow tl e gap and makedirect negotiation possible, we also provide militaryand economic assistance to our friends in the r gionto bolster their security in the fa e of continuing threats. Moderate regimes must be secure if they areto run the risks of making peace. At the same time,we remain willing to confront nd build international pressure against those states, such as Libya and Iran,which sponsor terrorism and promote ubversionagainst friendly governments.

Sinc 1 49, our diplomatic commitment to regional stability and undisrupted commerce has beensupported by our military policy of maintaining apermanent naval presence in the Persian Gul . Thatpr sen e is currently expanded to allow us toterIranian attempts to intimidate m derate stat 5 in theregion, and to play our traditional role of protectingU.s.-flag shipping in the face of increased Iranian aggressiveness. Five other ATO governments havealso made deci ions to deploy naval v ssels to theGulf where they assist in prote ting freedom ofnavigation. A prudent but responsive policy of armssales for the self-def nse of our friends in the region isaIso an integral part of ou r strategy, as those nati sas ume gre t r responsibility for their own defense.In South Asia, we aim to reduce regional tensions,especially those bet een India and Pakist n; to restorefr edom in Afghanistan; to promote democra icpolitical institutions and economi dev I pment; toend narcotics producti n and trafficking; and todiscourage nu I ar proliferation. These objectives arethreatened primarily by the Soviet occupation ofAfghanistan, the continuing antagonism between Indiaan Pakist n, and the refusal of those two states to restrain sensitive a pects f their nuclear programs.In dealing with the pr lem of nuclear proliferation inS uth A i I we have followed a two-track ap roach.

First, we have made clear to the government of Pakistan that our provision of security assistance requires Pakistani nuclear restraint. At the same time, provisionofmilitary and economic assistance helps Pakistan meet legitimate security needs without resortingto the acquisition of nuclear weapons. Secondly,recogn izing that there is a regional context for thePakistani nuclear program, we have encouraged Indiaand Pakistan toward an agreement on confidence building measures. We are encouraged that theleadership in both countries is actively looking forways to improve their relations with each other.

We remain unequivocally opposed to the Soviet military presence in Afghanistan. In the absence of apolitical settlement which provides for a prompt andcomplete withdrawal of Soviet troops, restoration ofAfghanistan to its independent non-a Iigned status, andself-determination for the Afghan people, we willcontinue our firm support for the Afghan cause. Weal so work to bolster the security of Pakistan, thefrontline state hosting nearly three million Afghan refugees, with a second six-year assistance plan. Byexpanding our ties with India as well as Pakistan, wehope to foster stability in South Asia. Recent advancesin technological and scientific cooperation betweenthe United States and India, in both civilian andmilitary areas, with prospects for further growth, havebeen important in improving relations between ourtwo countries. We also provide development assistanceth roughout the region and support the work of theSouth Asian Association for Regional Cooperation topromote stability by fostering regional economic growth.The sharp reduction in US economic and military assistance funding, plus Congressional opposition tothe sale of modern defense weapons to a number ofstates, has had a negative impact on U.s. security interests in both the Middle East and South Asia.These cutbacks in security assistance have been all themore damaging because threats to friendly states haveincreased thei r need for security assistance andweapons. At the same time, the Soviet Union hasbecome more aggressive in offering weapons tocountries unable to obtain them from the United States. The Soviets have also become more active inusing economic instruments such as debt reschedulingto enhance their own political influence.

STRATEGY FOR EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFICAs a Pacific power the United States faces formidable challenges in projecting its strength across that broad region. Our security objectives, as elsewhere, areaimed at helping our allies and friends in the regionto develop economically and politically as they defend themselves from encroachment. We are meeting withsuccess in most areas. The free nations of East Asiaand the Pacific now lead the world in demonstratingan economic and political dynamism that stands instark contrast with conditions in other nations in theregions such as Vietnam and North Korea. Our Asian allies and friends also stood together with us in theyears of effort required to achieve the INF Treaty,which removes a threat from Asia, as well as fromWestern Europe.Soviet military power in Asia and the Pacific continuesits steady qualitative improvement, but the u.s.response is not confined to technical issues of relative military strength. Our basic aims are to strengthen thenatural political and economic ties that link us withregional states, to evoke greater participation by ourallies and friends in their own defense, and toproceed steadily with necessary modernization of ourmilitary forces deployed to the area.Cooperation with Japan remains basic to u.s.relationships in the region. The United States-Japan Treaty of Cooperation and Security formalizes ourdefense ties, providing a security foundation for thebroad spectrum of economic and political associationswhich uniquely join us.During the past ten years, a consensus has emerged inJapan that Japan should undertake the primary responsibility to defend its homeland, territorial seasand skies, and its sea lanes out to 1,000 nauticalmiles. In 1985 the government of Japan incorporatedthat concept into its current Five Year Defense Plan.Japan's defense spending has increased more than fivepercent per year in real terms for the past five years,and we have encouraged Japan to continue modernizing its forces in order to carry out itslegitimate defense responsibilities. In addition toproviding for its own defense forces, Japan contributesover $2 billion per year to support U.S. forces stationed in Japan.The economic dimension of our relationship withJapan, as well as with other key nations in the region,is so prominent that it must be considered an integralpart of our national security strategy. The massivetrade surplus of Japan with the United States isunsustainable and a source of political tension, as arethe lesser surpluses of other regional nations. Sucheconomic imbalances must be reduced through acombination of measures including support for U.s.initiatives for multilateral trade liberalization in theGATT.In view of the globalization of financial markets,cooperation with Japan on economic policy will bekey to maintaining confidence on world stock andcurrency markets. A recent positive development is Japan's significantly increased expenditures on foreign assistance. Japan continues to target assistance oncountries of strategic importance, and is giving moreof its aid in "untied" form than in the past.Our alliance with the Republic of Korea remains vitalto regional stability. North Korea maintains forces thatfar exceed those of the South in quantity, arecontinuously strengthened by additional Soviet weapons, and are in the hands of a governmentwhose aggressive demeanor and tendency to actunexpectedly are well known. Our military presencein the Republic of Korea underpins regional stabilityand builds confidence, which is essential to thatcountry's remarkable economic development andpolitical evolution. Sound security, politics, andeconomics are indivisible. In this process, the United States has used its influence to encourage Koreans toward democratic change. We have done so, hQ\.'1ever,with respect for Korean traditions and political realities; and we are mindful of the constant security threat. The Republic of Korea ;s our seventh largest trading partner; significant market and investment opportunities for U.s. firms exist. Market access barriers are coming down, but not fast enough, andmuch more remains to be done.Both the People's Republic of China and the United States have cultivated good relations based on realistic calculations of each country's best interests. For ourpart, we continue to believe that a strong, secure, andmodernizing China is in our interest. Although oureconomic, social, and political systems differ, we sharea common perception of the requirement for stabilityin the region and for resistance to expansionism. Onthis basis, we have continued to increase our trade,people-ta-people contacts, and even limited, defensive military cooperation. Differences persist over someissues, but we have continued to develop a mature relationship that clearly benefits both countries.Through assiduous management of the United StatesChina relationship, we expect to cooperate when ourinterests and China's are parallel, such as inAfghanistan, and in maintaining stability in East Asia.We are confident a level-headed national consensuson how to conduct relations with China wi I! remainthe foundation for additional growth and interaction inthe relationship.The Philippine government has made progress restoring democracy and laying the foundation foreconomic growth. The Aquino government, however,continues to face major political, security andeconomic challenges. Through all of the tools available to us, we are determined to help thisimportant Pacific ally to overcome these problems soit can sustain economic growth, counter the threat ofa virulent internal communist insurgency, andstrengthen democratic government.Thailand, another Association of Southeast Nations(ASEAN) member, and our treaty arty, borders Cambodia, which is now occupied by the Vietnameseand the site of an active Cambodian resistance effort struggling to regain self-determination for the Khmerpeople. In support of Thailand, which also shouldersthe major refugee burden in Southeast Asia, we willcontinue our dose security cooperation to deter anypotential aggression and maintain our support ofeligible refugees. We will also continue ourcooperative effort with Thailand to suppress narcotictrafficking.We view the continued occupation of Cambodia byVietnamese forces as an unacceptable violation ofinternational law that undermines regional efforts towards development, peace and stability. We alsooppose the return of the Khmer Rouge to power inCambodia. We will continue our strong endorsementof ASEAN's quest for a political solution and supportfor the non-Communist elements of the Cambodian resistance coalition. Under our initiative on regional problems at the United Nations, we are prepared toplaya constructive role in efforts to achieve aCambodian settlement. In the context of a selliementinvolving the complete withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, we are prepared to enter into normalizationtalks with Vietnam.Despite our serious differences with Vietnam, through bilateral discussions we have achieved progress inaccounting for our missing servicemen, and in releaseof reeducation internees and Amerasians. We havealso seen a modest but welcome improvement inrelations between laos and the United States. Our primary measure of Laotian sincerity in improving relations with the u.s. is accelerated efforts to accountfor our servicemen still missing.As Australia enters its bicentennial year, close bilateralbonds and security relationships continue to be thekeystone of our policy in the region. But regrettably,New Zealand has now written into law the policiesthat caused us to suspend our ANZUS Treaty obligations to Wellington. This has dimmed the prospect of New Zealand's resuming its place in theAlliance.The South Pacific more broadly is passing through agenerational change and the stresses of economic anddemographic shifts. The island nations of the South Pacific have joined the legion of commodity-exporting countries whose efforts to develop a stable economicbase have been undermined by persistently low world commodity prices. At the same time, the positive effects of improved health care have produced rapid increases in population. Memories of U.s. cooperationwith the islanders during World War [I are ,~;mming.Resource constraints have prevented I;: from assistingas much as we would wish, but we expect Congressto approve expeditiously authorization for $10 million annually over the 5-year life of the new fisheries treatywith the region's islands states. This should help offsetsome of the irritants that have troubled our traditionalgood relations in the region and have invited Soviet probes.In Fiji this past year, we have sorrowfully witnessed aprolonged struggle within that nation's ethnic communities over their future. We remain committedto encouraging a broadly based resolution of Fiji'spolitical troubles.The decision of the people of Palau last year toaccede to the Compact of Free Association lays thefoundation for creation of a third freely associatedstate and for closing our UN. trusteeship in thePacific [slands. This act of self-determination promotesour belief in stability through democracy; and theCompact of Free Association helps accomplish ourgoal of preventing these Pacific states from becoming caught up in superpower rivalry.Soviet interest in East Asia and the Pacific remains onthe upswing, however, as Moscow's increasingly skillful propagandists seek to erode the concept ofdeterrence and promote seemingly benign disarmament schemes. The United States and thepeople of the region naturally seek a reduction oftensions. But this should begin at the real points oftenSion-North Korea and Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia, for example. We will not be lured intoproposals designed to weaken relations with our alliesor unilaterally impair our ability to protect U.S.interests in East Asia and the Pacific region.

STRATEGY FOR AFRICAThe diversity of Africa embodies a broad range ofnational security interests and presents numerous challenges far the United States. We maintain military?('~ess or U.s. facilities in several countries in supportof our strategic interests in the region and beyond(such as in Southvvest Asia and the Persian Gulf).Africa is an important source of strategic minerals anda potential growth market for U.s. exports. Its shoresadjoin some of the most important international sealanes. It represents a significant voting group in theUnited Nations and other international organizations.A number of domestic and external pressures posethreats to our interests in African security. The SovietUnion and its surrogates have made the Horn ofAfrica an arena for East-West competition. They havesustained a costly civil war in Angola which hasshattered the country's economy and seriously degraded the quality of life for innocent civilians. TheSoviet Union has viewed southern Africa as anopportune area for its expansionist policies. And it hasbeen the preeminent military supplier for Libya'sMuammar Qaddhafi, whose southward aggression threatens Chad and other sub-Saharan African countries. Apartheid will not only continue to breedconflict within South Africa, but is a primary cause ofinstability in all of southern Africa.Perhaps as in no other region, economic concerns areclosely interrelated with olitical stability in Africa.After more than two decades of misguided statist policies which produced economic deterioration,many African countries are now recognizing thatmarket-orien ed economic reform is critical forrenewed growth and development. Pu lie reaction tothe stringent reforms which are now needed will poseanother kind of threat to political stability, at least inthe near term. Moreover; Africa's heavy debt burdenhas stymied he abilities of governments to movebeyond economic reform to economic growth.An effective U.S. strategy toward Africa integratespolitical, military, and economic elements. We mustcontinue to sustain relationship with our militarypartn rs and support regimes threatened by Soviet andLibyan aspirations. We will work for national reconciliation and the peaceful resolution of conflictsin Angola, Namibia, and elsewhere. We will continueto promote peaceful progress toward non-racial representative democracy in South Africa, and peace between South Africa and its neighbors. We support regional economic cooperation among the countriesof southern Africa and will assist collaborative effortsto achieve economic development. e mustencourage governments to stay the politically risky course of e onomic reform.In a region as underdeveloped as Africa, which hasrelatively little access to private sources of capital, ourability to achieve our objectives depends in verysignificant measure on effective economic and security assistance programs. Too often security assistance isportrayed as a tradeoff against support fordevelopment. In Africa, this distinction is particularlyill-founded. Our security assistance programs promotea stable political and economic environment thatpermits the exercise of individual choice and thedevelopment of human talent. Without thatenvironment, sustained development is not possible.u.s. military assistance programs in Africa have alwaysbeen modest, but recently funding has been almost eliminated by Congress. It is in our national interest toprovide a reasonable level of support to moderate,friendly countries such as Kenya and zaire, to regimeson the front lines of Soviet-supported aggression suchas Somalia, and to countries facilitating access insupport of our strategies in Southwest Asia and thePersian Gulf.u.s. military training programs are an invaluable instrument for promoting professionalism and respectfor human rights. The exposure to Western values thatcomes from such programs may foster a respect forthe United States and democratic institutions among individuals who playa key role in determining thelevel of freedom and stabi lity in African countries.Many of these programs also contribute to economic security. The African Coastal Security Program, forexample, provides training to West African countries toenable them to protect their coastal fish stocks fromunauthorized foreign fishing fleets.The U.s. assistance program in South Africa forvictims of apartheid, enacted into law by Congress,helps prepare disenfran hised citizens for participationin constitutional democracy and a free enterprise economy in post-apartheid South Africa. Our newprogram for regional trade and transport developmentin the southern African states furthers our mutual political interests and enables these countries todevelop alternatives to total dependence on South Africa.As African countries struggle to liberalize and expandtheir economies, market economics are on trial. Ourchallenge is to be able to provide enough resources topermit new economic policies to bear fruit andenable African countries to become fully integratedinto the existing world trading and financial system. Apromising start has been made with the President'sInitiative to End Hunger in Africa, the African Economic Policy Reform Program, the Baker Planproviding assistance on debt, and the Food forProgress program. We must ensure that our assistance programs and those of other donor countries andinstitutions give impetus to further progress.As part of that effort, we will continue to work withour Western and Japanese partners to find creative solutions to the debt problem of countries implementing reforms. Our budgetary restrictions limitwhat we can do directly, but much is at stake. Although the aggregate debt is sma II com pared to thatof Latin America, it has prevented the growth benefitsof economic reform from being realized.

STRATEGY FOR LOW INTENSITY CONFLICTWhile high intensity conflict has been successfully deterred in most regions of primary strategic interest10 the United States, low intensity conflicts continueto pose a variety of threats to the achievement of

important U.s. objectives. As described in last year's report, tOYl intensity conflict typically manifests itselfas political-military confrontation below the level ofconventional war, frequently involving protracted struggles of competing principles and ideologies, andranging from subversion to the direct use of militaryforce. These conflicts, generally in the Third World,can have both regional and global implications for ournational security interests. For example: Military basing. access and transit rights in thePhilippines, key to u.s. power projection capabilities in the Western Pacific and IndianOceans, are presently threatened by the communist insurgency being waged against the Philippine Government. In mineral-rich southern Africa, insurgencies,economic instability and apartheid, as well asethnic tribal conflicts, pose potential threats to theextraction of essential raw materials and their exportto industries in the West and Japan. The conflicts endemic to the region are exacerbated by theactivity of the Soviet Union and its surrogates. Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan support forinsurgencies in El Salvador and else-.vhere in latinAmerica threaten nascent democracies in the regionwhich are already struggling with chronic poverty,economic underdevelopment, and the growing influence of narcotics cartels. libya has used the threat of restricting or denyingoil shipments to blunt West European response tostate-sponsored terrorism, while Simultaneouslytraining terrorists on libyan soil. Freedom of actionfor some U.s. allies can be limited by economicties.Our strategies for dealing with low intensity conflict recognize that U.S. responses in such situations mustbe realistic, often discreet, and founded on a clear relationship between the conflict's outcome andimportant U.s. national security interests. Many lowintensity conflicts have no direct relevance to those interests, while others may affect them in the mostfundamental ways. When a U.s. response is called for,vve take care to ensure that it is developed inaccordance with the principles of international anddomestic law, which affirm the inherent right of statesto use force in individual or collective self-defense against armed anack; and to assist one another inmaintaining internal order against insurgency,terrorism, illicit narcotics traffic, and othercharacteristic forms of low intensity conflict.Consistent with our strategies for dealing with lowinterest to do so,intensity conflict, when it is inthe United States will: Work to ameliorate the underlying causes ofconflict in the Third World by promoting economic development and the growth of democratic political institutions. Support selected resistance movements opposing oppressive regimes working against U.s. interests.Such support will be coordinated with friends andallies. Take measures to strengthen friendly nations facing internal or external threats to their independenceand stability by employing appropriate instrumentsof U.s. power. Where possible, action will be takenearly~before instability leads to widespread violence; and emphasis will be placed on those measures which strengthen the threatened regime'slong-term capability to deal with threats to itsfreedom and stability. Take steps to discourage Soviet and other state sponsored adventurism, and increase the costs tothose who use proxies or terrorist and subversive forces to exploit instability. Assist other countries in the interdiction anderadication of illicit narcotics production and traffic.Measures which have proven particularly effective include aid to expand and improve the affected country's law enforcement capabilities, to preservethe independence and integrity of its judicial system, and to provide for the sharing ofintelligence and investigative capabilities.Our own military forces have demonstrated capabilities to engage in low intensity conflict, andthese capabilities have improved substantially in thelast several years. But the most appropriate applicationof u.s. military power is usually indirect through security assistance-training, advisory help, logistics support, and the supply of essential military equipment. Recipients of such assistance bear the primary responsibility for promoting their own security interests with the U.s. aid provided. Our program ofassistance to EI Salvador illustrates a successful indirect application of U.S. military power.The balanced application of the various elements ofnational power is necessary to protect U.s. interests inlow intensity conflicts. But in the final analysis, theroo Is we have at our disposal are of little use withoutthe support of the American people, and their willingness to stay the course in what can beprotracted struggles. We cannot prevail if there is asharp asymmetry of wills-if our adversaries'determination is greater than our own. At the sametime we do hold important advantages. We represent amodel of political and economic development thatpromises freedom from political oppression andeconomic privation. If we can protect our ownsecurity, and maintain an environment of reasonable stability and open trade and communication throughout the Third World, political, economic, andsocial forces should eventually work to our advantage.

Executing the Strategy

The legislation requiring this annual report wisely emphasized the importance of discussing not onlywhat our strategy is, but how well it is supported, andwhether any significant impediments to its executionexist. In a sense, this portion of the report is the mostimportant, for it brings into focus the fundamentalissue of whether ou r strategy and resources are in balance; and, if they are not, whether we should resolvethe imbalance by changing the strategy, by supportingit more effectively, or by consciously accepting ahigher level of risk to our national security interests.The following paragraphs will discuss u.s. capabilitiesto execute the ational Security Strategy presented inprecedi ng chapters, with particular attention to thoseareas where resource shortfalls adversely affect ourability to execute the strategy in efficient and effectiveways.

RESOURCE SUPPORTThe successfu I execution of any strategy dependsupon the avai labi Iity of adequate resources. Thismeans that we must not adopt strategies that ourcountry cannot afford; and our diplomats and military leaders must not base their plans on resources that arebeyond the nation's capability to provide. It alsomeans that Congress, operating from a shared view ofu.s. national security interests and objectives, mustprovide the Executive with the resources necessary toimplement a realistic, prudent, and effective National Security Strategy. Recelltly, however, the Congressional response has been inadequate.For example, U.S. foreign assistance, including abalanced mix of military and economic assistance,promotes important national interests and helps communicate our values and principles throughoutthe world. These programs convert our regional strategies into positive, visible actions which provide assistance to people facing severe economic privation,and promote the economic and political developmentso important to help struggling societies evolve inconstructive ways. They also help governments seekingto defend themselves from internal and external threats. By helping our friends enhance their security,we aid in creating the necessary preconditions foreconomic and political development. In short, ourforeign assistance programs support the types ofpositive change that will protect our national interestsover the long-term.We currently spend less than two percent of ourannual federal budget on foreign assistance. This isindisputably money well spent. The good we do, theproblems we help solve, and the threats we counterthrough our assistance programs far outweigh thecosts. They represent a highly leveraged investment,with large payoffs for relatively small outlays.Nevertheless, our foreign assistance programs do notreceive the support they deserve from the Congress orfrom the American people. In the last few years, theAdmi nistration's foreign assistance budget requestshave been severely cut by the Congress. Although allprograms must bear the burden of reducing thebudget deficit, the cuts in foreign assistance have oftenbeen grossly disproportionate. While the federal budget has been growing overall, foreign assistancewas reduced by 29 percent in FY86, an additional 11percent in FY87, and faces another reduction in FY88.The security assistance account now falls significantlybelow the level needed to maintain, with noexpansion, programs critical to our national security interests.The problem of inadequate funding for foreign assistance is compounded by Congressionallymandated earmarks and restrictions that take an everlarger piece of a shrinking pie. In recent years,Congressional action has earmarked as much as 90percent of certain foreign assistance accounts tospecific countries. These and other restrictions forceus to conduct foreign policy with our hands tied. vVeare losing the ability to allocate resources accordingto our strategic priorities, and we have virtually noleeway to respond to emergencies with reallocationsof funds. The effects of earmarking on the developing countries is particularly damaging. These smallerprograms bear a disproportionate share of the burdenwhen funds earmarked for large programs aremaintained at a constant level while the overall assistance program is cut.The adverse effects of funding cuts are not limited toour foreign development and security assistance programs. To properly coordinate these instrumentsand to carry out our policies, we rely on ourdiplomatic missions abroad. No foreign policy, nomatter how conceptually brilliant, can succeed unlessit is based on accurate information about, and correct interpretation of, the developments in countries we areattempting to influence. We need to be able topersuade others that our goals are worth supportingand that our means are appropriate. The essentialtasks of information, analysis and communication arethe primary responsibility of our embassies andconsulates.Funds available for operating the Department of Stateand our embassies and consulates overseas have beencut to an unprecedented point. What that means inreal terms is fewer people to work on formulating andimplementing the nation's foreign policy at all levels. Itmeans fewer diplomatic and consular posts-postswhich are the eyes and ears of the U.s. Government abroad. It means not providing the country with thelevel of services, reporting, analysis, or there presentation and protection of global U.s. intereststhat we have come to expect.It cannot be stressed too strongly that our diplomatic establishment and our foreign assistance programs arean essential part of our political and economic elements of power. We cannot support our National Security Strategy without them. They work to resolve tensions and ameliorate conflicts that, if ignored,could degenerate into crises adversely affecting U.s.interests. Unless we are willing to be an active participant in promoting the type of world order wedesire, we may find ourselves compelled to defendour interests with more direct, costly, and painfulmeans. Congressional action to shore up support forthis weakened link in our capability for strategy execution should receive high priority attention.Adequate and sustained resource support is alsoneeded for our defense programs. Providing for thecommon defense is the most important responsibilityof the federal government-shared equally by theExecutive and Legislative branches. Partnership is thekey to its successful execution. In that spirit, in theearly 1980s-for the third time since World War 11Congress and the Executive joined in a concerted effort to rebuild and strengthen our military capabilities. It was clear at that time that only anincrease in defense investment would produce thenecessary sustained impact on the military balance,and redress the serious disparities between U.S. andSoviet capabilities which had emerged during the1970s-a period of unprecedented military investmentby the Soviets aimed at shifting the global "correlationof forces" in a decisive and irreversible way.Fortunately, the Congress and the American people recognized the criticality of rebuilding the country'sdefenses, and we made impressive progress. Having arrested the adverse trend, however, the challengethen became not to lose the momentum gained always a difficult task in a democracy. Unfortunately,we have not done as well in that regard.When I submitted the FY88 Budget a year ago, r didnot ask the Congress to approve Defense funding increases of the magnitude that characterized those ofthe early 1980s. At the same time, I did emphasizethat Congress must act positively to protect the gainsthat we together had achieved. In particular, I stressedthat we must not continue on the path of decline inreal defense spending established during thepreceding two years. With lack of perspective, we hadbegun a process of reversing the improvements in theU.S.-Soviet balance achieved during the early 1980s,Regrettably, this process continued with the legislative action on the FY88 budget.While the Defense figures coming out of the "budget summit" were significantly less damaging than wouldhave been the case had sequestration occurred, theycontinued the downward trend of the Defense Budget,in real terms, for the third year in a row. Soviet spending, on the other hand, maintained its historical pattern of real growth on the order of 3.5 percent annually during this period of U.s. decline. Theunfortunate consequence is that sometime in thefuture the American people will again be asked tosupport defense capabilities for which they thoughtthey had once paid. In the meantime, the inefficient procurement rates associated with instability andreduced budgetary resources exacerbate the impact ofthe Defense Budget cuts.The FY88 cuts, coming on top of two prior years ofdecline, have confronted us with a situation in whichwe must now either reduce the readiness of ourforces, or lower investment and eliminate force structure in order to allow our remaining military unitsto function at an acceptable level of combat capability. Either way, risk will grow, and deterrencewill be reduced.The strategic implication of this continuing decline isthat u.s. forces will confront additional risk in regionswhere the potential exists fOf high-intensity conflict,and particularly in their ability to conduct highintensity operations in more than one theatersimultaneously. In global conflict this could require usto forego opportunities to bring the conflict to early termination by exerting military pressures on theSoviets from several directions. It increases thelikelihood that force limitations will require us toconduct sequential operations in successive theaters,with the risk and uncertainty which that approach entails.Some will argue that the cuts do not really injure ourdefense capability; that with greater imagination and awillingness to innovate, we can do more with less inthe defense area. In this viev.-, more thoughtful military strategy, improved tactics, or changed emphasis inforce structure, can compensate for reduced resource levels. In fact, our commanders work continuously tofind better ways to use the forces we have. With ourallies, we constantly strive to improve force effectiveness, to capitalize on Soviet vulnerabilities,and to employ competitive strategies which exploitour technological, geographic or other advantages tostress the Soviets' system and require them to makedisadvantageous investments. We seek out new ideason military strategy and force employment, and adopt

those which promise real gains in military effectiveness; but we should be under no illUSions thatthere are quick fixes which can fundamentally reduceour current military requirements.In this regard, it is noteworthy that-pursuant torecommendations of the 1986 Blue Ribbon Panel onDefense Management-the Joint Chiefs of Staff overthe past year have conducted a global net assessmentof U.S. and Soviet capabilities and reviewed thenational military strategy to examine whetheralternative approaches could improve our overall military capability at a given budget level. Theyconcluded that none of the particular alternatives examined was as effective as the capabilities generatedunder current plans and strategy.That is not surprising, given the fact that our military strategy and supporting force structure are based oncertain fundamental conditions which change slowly,if at all. These include the immutables of geography;the division of labor entailed in our alliance relationships; our advantage in certain advanced technologies; the large capital investment we have inexisting forces; and the evolution of the threat. Wewill continue to review our military strategy torevalidate and update its essential elements. But in ourdeliberations we need to distinguish between soundly analyzed recommendations for improvements in U.S.or allied strategy-which can be helpful-and thosethat simply call for a strategy which costs less, without regard to the range of security interests it can assure.Another way sometimes suggested to compensate forreduced resource levels is to scale back U.S.commitments. But commitments are not an end inthemselves; they are simply ways of protecting U.s.interests and achieving the objectives of our National Security Strategy.While details of those interests and objectives mayvary over time, as noted in the first chapter of this report their core elements have changed little since the1950s. No one seriously advocates abrogation of ourtreaty relationships with the NATO nations, Japan, thePhilippines, Thailand, Australia, or our Hemispheric neighbors. Nor do responsible voices argue againstour strategic relationship with Israel, our friendly tieswith Egypt, or our cooperative relations with othermoderate Arab states. The regional strategy sections ofthis report illustrate how our diplomatic, economic,and milital)' relationships with these and other keycountries interact to support fundamental U.s. interestsand objectives. While there may be room foradjustments at the margin in our contributions toregional security, none of our current commitmentsare plausible candidates for major reduction, given thescope of our global interests, the threats to those interests, and the increasingly interdependent nature offree world political, economic, and security relationships. Both Congress and the Executive Branch should continue to review our commitments worldwide, but I see no prudent way to reduce those commitments while remaining true to our values,maintaining essential and mutually beneficial alliance relationships, and safeguarding our future.This does not imply that the United States isnecessarily satisfied with the contributions which ourallies and friends make to the common defense inthose regions where we have major milital)'commitments. In Europe in particular, our NATO alliescan and should do more to enhance Alliance conventional defense capabilities. We will continue topress them for more appropriate levels of defense investment and improved efficiency in the use ofAlliance resources, while rejecting the self-defeating argument that the failure of some allies to meetagreed goals should prompt us to reduce our owncontribution to Alliance capabilities. We are in Europe because it is in our interest to be there; and, withinthe limits of Congressional funding, we will continueto contribute those forces which we believe areessential to the support of our national security interests and objectives. At the same time we expectour allies to show an equal interest in the common defense, and to recognize the need to take on anincreasing share of the burden as we work together toimprove NATO's conventional defense capability andthe plans for employing it.Finally, I should note that the defense program required to support our strategy is eminently affordable. In fact, in the past seven years, Americanshave devoted an average of only 6.1 percent of gross national product (GNP) to national defense-wellunder rates in the 1950s and 1960s, which averagedabout 10 percent. Similarly, at about 28 percent offederal outlays, defense spending falls \'o/II belO\\I thepeacetime average of 41 percent during the postwarera. In both instances, the increases of the early 1980sseem large only because the spending of the late1970s, which averaged less than 5 percent of GNP,was so severely depressed. The resources needed tosupport our national strategy, at a prudent level ofrisk, are within our ability to pay. failure to providethese resources simply defers to future budgets thetask of regaining lost ground, while increasing risks toour security in the near-term.

BIPARTISAN COOPERATIONThe continued development and successful executionof U.s. National Security Strategy is a major responsibility of the Executive Branch. But, as theforegoing discussion has emphasized, we cannot accomplish this alone. Supporting a security strategythat provides a sound vision for the future and arealistic guide to action must be a cooperative endeavor of the Administration and the Congress.In this regard, I believe both branches need to reviewtheir constitutional roles and the relationship betweenthem in the national security area. There areimportant powers here; some that are best shared,some that are Presidential responsibilities. After sevenyears in office, I am convinced that the numerous consultative arrangements established between the twobranches in areas such as arms negotiations,intelligence, and milital)' contingency operations generally represent the best way to coordinate ourviews and resolve our differences. We should continueto look for ways to improve these arrangements; butthey are far superior to more rigid structural alternatives that, in response to a specific set ofcircumstances, would attempt to define in law theprecise constitutional boundaries of Executive andLegislative authority which the founding fathers purposely left in broad terms.Equally detrimental is the increasing tendency of theCongress to act in a directive manner with regard todetails of foreign, defense, and arms control policy,limiting the flexibility of the Executive Branch byenacting into law positions on which the President should be allowed reasonable discretion. This trend diminishes our ability to conduct rational andcoherent policies on the world scene; reduces ourleverage in critical negotiations; and impedes theintegrated use of U.s. power to achieve important

national security objectives. It causes others to viewus as unreliable, and diminishes our influence generally.In addition, I would suggest that the Congress reconsider how it can best organize itself for fulfilingits Constitutional role. Over the past twenty years,power and authority have effectively drifted away fromexperienced leadership and committee chairmen, andtoward individual members and special interestcoalitions. From a Congressional perspective, Cabinet Secretaries and White House advisers may present diverse points of view while policy is in the formativestate; but the President speaks with authority oncepolicy decisions are made. The President, however,faces a far different situation in dealing with Congress.In approaching the Congress as a partne.r in theformulation of national security policy, the Presidentmust have confidence that the Legislative branch leadership is capable of implementing any consensusthat is reached, without being second-guessed orundercut by autonomous members or interest groups.This suggests the need for other legislative reforms. Ihave often emphasized that restoring and maintainingan adequate military balance, and fulfilling ourinternational obligations, requires a long view andfiscal stability. This is not accomplished in a repetitiveand topsy-turvy annual budget cycle. We must facesquarely the need for multi-year authorizations andappropriations, consistent with constitutional

limitations, in order to support our national securityand international affairs programs more efficiently andeffectively. While some progress has been made,particularly with the recent adoption by the Congressof a partial two-year defense authorization bi II, muchmore can and should be done. In this regard, it isimportant to recall the conclusion of the Blue RibbonCommission on Defense Management that, in thefuture, significant efficiencies in the defense budgetare more likely to be achieved through greaterprogram stability than through specific management improvements by the Department of Defense.Above all, we must both work harder to rebuild abipartisan public consensus on our National Security Strategy and the resources needed to execute it. Thefundamental policies and strategies we have pursuedare similar to, and consistent with, those pursued byprevious generations of American leaders. Renewed consensus will be forged on the anvil of public debate-among responsible officials in government,between the Congress and the Executive, inconsultations with our allies and friends, and amongthe larger community of interested and concerned American citizens. We look forward to that debate andto working with the Congress to achieve increased understanding of, and broad support for, our ationalSecurity Strategy. There can be no endeavor moreimportant for the long-term well-being of theAmerican people; and I solicit the Congress' closest collaboration in achieving it.