As we approach the beginning of the 21 century, theUnited States remains the world's most powerfulforce for peace, prosperity and the universal valuesof democracy and freedom. Our nation's challenge-and our responsibility-is to sustain that role byharnessing the forces of global integration for thebenefit of our own people and people around theworld.

These forces of integration offer us an unprecedented opportunity to build new bonds among individuals and nations, to tap the world's vast human potential in support of shared aspirations, and tocreate a brighter future for our children. But they alsopresent new, complex challenges. The same forcesthat bring us closer increase our interdependence,and make us more vulnerable to forces like extreme nationalism, terrorism, crime, environmental damageand the complex flows of trade and investment thatknow no borders.

To seize these opportunities, and move against thethreats of this new global era, we are pursuing aforward-looking national security strategy attuned tothe realities of our new era. This report, submitted inaccordance with Section 603 of the GoldwaterNichols Defense Department Reorganization Act of1986, sets forth that strategy. Its three coreobjectives are:

To enhance our security.

To bolster America's economic prosperity.

To promote democracy abroad.

Over the past five years, we have been putting thisstrategy in place through a network of institutions andarrangements with distinct missions, but a common purpose-to secure and strengthen the gains ofdemocracy and free markets while turning back their enemies. Through this web of institutions andarrangements, the United States and its partners inthe international community are laying a foundationfor security and prosperity in the 21st century.This strategy encompasses a wide range ofinitiatives: expanded military alliances like NATO, itsPartnership for Peace, and its partnerships withRussia and Ukraine; promoting free trade through theWorld Trade Organization and the move toward freetrade areas by nations in the Americas andelsewhere around the world; strong arms control regimes like the Chemical Weapons Convention andthe Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty;multinational coalitions combating terrorism,corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and binding international commitments to protect the environmentand safeguard human rights.

The United States must have the tools necessary tocarry out this strategy. We have worked diligently within the parameters of the Balanced Budget Agreement to preserve and provide for the readinessof our armed forces while meeting priority military challenges identified in the 1997 QuadrennialDefense Review (QDR). The QDR struck a careful balance between near-term readiness, long-termmodernization and quality of life improvements forour men and women in uniform. It ensured that thehigh readiness levels of our forward-deployed and"first-to-fight" forces would be maintained. Thepriority we attach to maintaining a high-quality forceis reflected in our budget actions. This fiscal year,with Congress' support for the Bosnia and SouthwestAsia non-offset emergency supplemental funds, wewere able to protect our high payoff readiness accounts. Next year's Defense Budget increases funding for readiness and preserves quality of life formilitary personnel.

Although we have accomplished much on thereadiness front, much more needs to be done. Ourmilitary leadership and I are constantly reevaluatingthe readiness of our forces and addressing problemsin individual readiness areas as they arise. I haveinstructed the Office of Management and Budget andthe National Security Council to work with theDepartment of Defense to formulate a multi-year planwith the necessary resources to preserve military readiness, support our troops, and modernize theequipment needed for the next century. I amconfident that our military is-and will continue tobe-capable of carrying out our national strategy andmeeting America's defense commitments around theworld.

We must also renew our commitment to America'sdiplomacy-to ensure that we have the superb diplomatic representation that our people deserve andour interests demand. Every dollar we devote topreventing conflicts, promoting democracy, andstopping the spread of disease and starvation brings asure return in security and savings. Yet international affairs spending today totals just one percent of thefederal budget-a small fraction of what America invested at the start of the Cold War when we chose engagement over isolation. If America is to continueto lead the world by its own example, we mustdemonstrate our own commitment to these prioritytasks. This is also why we must pay our dues to theUnited Nations.

Protecting our citizens and critical infrastructures athome is an essential element of our strategy.Potential adversaries-whether nations, terrorist groups or criminal organizations-will be tempted todisrupt our critical infrastructures, impede government operations, use weapons of massdestruction against civilians, and prey on our citizens overseas. These challenges demand close cooperation across all levels of government-federal,state and local-and across a wide range ofagencies, including the Departments of Defense andState, the Intelligence Community, law enforcement,emergency services, medical care providers andothers. Protecting our critical infrastructure requiresnew partnerships between government and industry.Forging these new structures will be challenging, butmust be done if we are to ensure our safety at homeand avoid vulnerabilities that those wishing us illmight try to exploit in order to erode our resolve toprotect our interests abroad.

The United States has profound interests at stake inthe health of the global economy. Our future prosperity depends upon a stable international financial system and robust global growth. Economic stability and growth are essential for the spread offree markets and their integration into the global economy. The forces necessary for a healthy global economy are also those that deepen democratic liberties: the free flow of ideas and information, openborders and easy travel, the rule of law, fair andeven-handed enforcement, protection for consumers,a skilled and educated work force. If citizens tire ofwaiting for democracy and free markets to deliver abetter life for them, there is a real risk that they willlose confidence in democracy and free markets. Thiswould pose great risks not only for our economic interests but for our national security.

We are taking a number of steps to help contain thecurrent financial turmoil in Asia and other parts of theworld. We are working with other industrialized nations, the International Monetary Fund and theWorld Bank to spur growth, stop the financial crisisfrom spreading, and help the victims of financial turmoil. We have also intensified our efforts to reform international trade and financial institutions: building astronger and more accountable global trading system, pressing forward with market-opening initiatives, advancing the protection of labor and theenvironment and doing more to ensure that tradehelps the lives of ordinary citizens across the globe.At this moment in history, the United States is calledupon to lead-to organize the forces of freedom andprogress; to channel the unruly energies of the global economy into positive avenues; and to advance ourprosperity, reinforce our democratic ideals andvalues, and enhance our security.

I. Introduction

We must judge our national security strategy by itssuccess in meeting the fundamental purposes set outin the preamble to the Constitution:

...provide for the common defence, promote thegeneral Welfare, and secure the Blessings ofLiberty to ourselves and our Posterity,...Since the founding of the nation, certain requirementshave remained constant. We must protect the livesand personal safety of Americans, both at home andabroad. We must maintain the sovereignty, political freedom and independence of the United States, withits values, institutions and territory intact. And, wemust promote for the well being and prosperity of thenation and its people.

Challenges and Opportunities

The security environment in which we live is dynamicand uncertain, replete with a host of threats andchallenges that have the potential to grow moredeadly, but also offering unprecedented opportunitiesto avert those threats and advance our interests.Globalization-the process of accelerating economic,technological, cultural and political integration-means that more and more we as a nation areaffected by events beyond our borders. Outlawstates and ethnic conflicts threaten regional stabilityand economic progress in many important areas ofthe world. Weapons of mass destruction (WMD),terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime areglobal concerns that transcend national borders.

Other problems that once seemed quite distant-such as resource depletion, rapid population growth,environmental damage, new infectious diseases anduncontrolled refugee migration-have important implications for American security. Our workers andbusinesses will suffer if foreign markets collapse orlock us out, and the highest domestic environmental standards will not protect us if we cannot get othersto achieve similar standards. In short, our citizenshave a direct stake in the prosperity and stability ofother nations, in their support for international normsand human rights, in their ability to combat international crime, in their open markets, and in their effortsto protect the environment.

Yet, this is also a period of great promise. Globalization is bringing citizens from all continents closertogether, allowing them to share ideas, goods andinformation at the tap of a keyboard. Many nations around the world have embraced America's corevalues of representative governance, free market economics and respect for fundamental human rightsand the rule of law, creating new opportunities topromote peace, prosperity and greater cooperationamong nations. Former adversaries now cooperatewith us. The dynamism of the global economy istransforming commerce, culture, communicationsand global relations, creating new jobs and economic opportunity for millions of Americans.

The Imperative of Engagement

Our strategic approach recognizes that we must leadabroad if we are to be secure at home, but we cannotlead abroad unless we are strong at home. We mustbe prepared and willing to use all appropriate instruments of national power to influence the actionsof other states and non-state actors. Today'scomplex security environment demands that all ourinstruments of national power be effectively integrated to achieve our security objectives. Wemust have the demonstrated will and capabilities tocontinue to exert global leadership and remain thepreferred security partner for the community of statesthat share our interests. We have seen in the pastthat the international community is often reluctant toact forcefully without American leadership. In manyinstances, the United States is the only nation capable of providing the necessary leadership andcapabilities for an international response to shared challenges. American leadership and engagementin the world are vital for our security, and our nationand the world are safer and more prosperous as aresult.

The alternative to engagement is not withdrawal fromthe world; it is passive submission to powerful forcesof change-all the more ironic at a time when ourcapacity to shape them is as great as it has everbeen. Three-quarters of a century ago, the United States helped to squander Allied victory in World WarI by embracing isolationism. After World War II, andin the face of a new totalitarian threat, America accepted the challenge to lead. We remained engaged overseas and worked with our allies tocreate international structures-from the MarshallPlan, the United Nations, NATO and other defense arrangements, to the International Monetary Fundand the World Bank-that enabled us to strengthenour security and prosperity and win the Cold War. Byexerting our leadership abroad we have deterred aggression, fostered the resolution of conflicts,strengthened democracies, opened foreign marketsand tackled global problems such as protecting theenvironment. U.S. leadership has been crucial to thesuccess of negotiations that produced a wide rangeof treaties that have made the world safer and moresecure by limiting, reducing, preventing the spread of,or eliminating weapons of mass destruction and otherdangerous weapons. Without our leadership andengagement, threats would multiply and ouropportunities would narrow.

Underpinning our international leadership is thepower of our democratic ideals and values. Indesigning our strategy, we recognize that the spreadof democracy supports American values andenhances both our security and prosperity.

Democratic governments are more likely to cooperatewith each other against common threats, encouragefree trade, and promote sustainable economic development. They are less likely to wage war orabuse the rights of their people. Hence, the trend toward democracy and free markets throughout theworld advances American interests. The United States will support this trend by remaining actively engaged in the world. This is the strategy to take usinto the next century.

Implementing the Strategy

Our global leadership efforts will continue to beguided by President Clinton's strategic priorities: tofoster regional efforts led by the community ofdemocratic nations to promote peace and prosperityin key regions of the world, to increase cooperation inconfronting new security threats that defy bordersand unilateral solutions, to strengthen the military,diplomatic and law enforcement tools necessary tomeet these challenges and to create more jobs andopportunities for Americans through a more open andcompetitive economic system that also benefits others around the world. Our strategy is tempered byrecognition that there are limits to America'sinvolvement in the world. We must be selective inthe use of our capabilities and the choices we makealways must be guided by advancing our objectivesof a more secure, prosperous and free America.We must always be prepared to act alone when thatis our most advantageous course. But many of oursecurity objectives are best achieved-or can only beachieved-through our alliances and other formal security structures, or as a leader of an ad hoccoalition formed around a specific objective. Durable relationships with allies and friendly nations are vitalto our security. A central thrust of our strategy is tostrengthen and adapt the security relationships wehave with key nations around the world and createnew relationships and structures when necessary.

Examples include NATO enlargement, thePartnership for Peace, the NATO-Russia PermanentJoint Council, the African Crisis Response Initiative,the regional security dialogue in the ASEAN RegionalForum and the hemispheric security initiatives adopted at the Summit of the Americas. At othertimes we harness our diplomatic, economic, militaryand information strengths to shape a favorable international environment outside of formal structures. This approach has borne fruit in areas asdiverse as the elimination of nuclear weapons fromUkraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, ourcomprehensive assistance package for Russia andother Newly Independent States (NIS), theadvancement of peace in Northern Ireland, andsupport for the transformation of South Africa.Protecting our citizens and critical infrastructures athome is an intrinsic and essential element of oursecurity strategy. The dividing line between domesticand foreign policy is increasingly blurred. Globalization enables other states, terrorists, criminals, drugtraffickers and others to challenge the safety of ourcitizens and the security of our borders in new ways.

The security challenges wrought by globalization demand close cooperation across all levels ofgovernment-federal, state and local-and across awide range of agencies, including the Departments ofDefense and State, the Intelligence Community, lawenforcement, emergency services, medical careproviders and others. Protecting our critical infrastructure requires new partnerships between government and industry. Forging these new structures andrelationships will be challenging, but must be done ifwe are to ensure our safety at home and avoidvulnerabilities that those wishing us ill might try toexploit in order to erode our resolve to protect ourinterests abroad.

Engagement abroad rightly depends on the willingness of the American people and the Congress tobear the costs of defending U.S. interests-in dollars,energy and, when there is no alternative, the risk oflosing American lives. We must, therefore, foster thebroad public understanding and bipartisan congressional support necessary to sustain ourinternational engagement, always recognizing thatsome decisions that face popular opposition mustultimately be judged by whether they advance theinterests of the American people in the long run.

II. Advancing U.S. National Interests

The goal of the national security strategy is to ensurethe protection of our nation's fundamental andenduring needs: protect the lives and safety ofAmericans, maintain the sovereignty of the United States with its values, institutions and territory intact,and promote the prosperity and well-being of thenation and its people. In our vision of the world, theUnited States has close cooperative relations with theworld's most influential countries and has the ability toinfluence the policies and actions of those who canaffect our national well-being.

We seek to create a stable, peaceful international security environment in which our nation, citizens andinterests are not threatened. The United States willnot allow a hostile power to dominate any region ofcritical importance to our interests. We will work toprevent the spread of nuclear, biological andchemical weapons and the materials for producingthem, and to control other potentially destabilizing technologies, such as long-range missiles. We willcontinue to ensure that we have effective means forcountering and responding to the threats we cannotdeter or otherwise prevent from arising. This includes protecting our citizens from terrorism, internationalcrime and drug trafficking.

We seek a world in which democratic values andrespect for human rights and the rule of law areincreasingly accepted. This will be achieved through broadening the community of free-market democracies, promoting an international communitythat is willing and able to prevent or respond effectively to humanitarian problems, andstrengthening international non-governmental movements committed to human rights anddemocratization. These efforts help prevent humanitarian disasters, promote reconciliation instates experiencing civil conflict and address migrationand refugee crises.

We seek continued American prosperity through increasingly open international trade and sustainable growth in the global economy. The health of theinternational economy directly affects our security,just as stability enhances the prospects for prosperity.Prosperity ensures that we are able to sustain ourmilitary forces, foreign initiatives and global influence.In turn, our engagement and influence helps ensurethat the world remains stable so the international economic system can flourish.

We seek a cleaner global environment to protect thehealth and well-being of our citizens. A deteriorating environment not only threatens public health, itimpedes economic growth and can generate tensionsthat threaten international stability. To the extent thatother nations believe they must engage in nonsustainable exploitation of natural resources, ourlong-term prosperity and security are at risk.

Since there are always many demands for U.S.action, our national interests must be clear. These interests fall into three categories. The first includesvital interests-those of broad, overriding importance to the survival, safety and vitality of our nation.Among these are the physical security of our territoryand that of our allies, the safety of our citizens, oureconomic well-being and the protection of our critical infrastructures. We will do what we must to defendthese interests, including-when necessary-usingour military might unilaterally and decisively.The second category includes situations in which important national interests are at stake. These interests do not affect our national survival, but theydo affect our national well-being and the character ofthe world in which we live. In such cases, we will useour resources to advance these interests insofar asthe costs and risks are commensurate with theinterests at stake. Our efforts to halt the flow ofrefugees from Haiti and restore democracy in thatstate, our participation in NATO operations in Bosniaand our efforts to protect the global environment arerelevant examples.

The third category is humanitarian and otherinterests. In some circumstances our nation may actbecause our values demand it. Examples include responding to natural and manmade disasters orviolations of human rights, supporting democratization and civil control of the military, assisting humanitarian demining, and promoting sustainable development. Often in such cases, the force of ourexample bolsters support for our leadership in theworld. Whenever possible, we seek to avert humanitarian disasters and conflict through diplomacyand cooperation with a wide range of partners,including other governments, international institutionsand non-governmental organizations. This may notonly save lives, but also prevent the drain onresources caused by intervention in crises.



Transnational threats: Terrorism, internationalcrime, drug trafficking, illicit arms trafficking,uncontrolled refugee migrations andenvironmental damage threaten U.S. interests,citizens and the U.S. homeland itself. Thepossibility of terrorists and other criminals usingWMD-nuclear, biological and chemical weapons-is of special concern. Threats to thenational information infrastructure, ranging fromcyber-crime to a strategic information attack onthe United States via the global information network, present a dangerous new threat to ournational security. We must also guard against threats to our other critical national infrastructures-such as electrical power andtransportation-which increasingly could take theform of a cyber-attack in addition to physical attack or sabotage, and could originate fromterrorist or criminal groups as well as hostile states. International drug trafficking organizationshave become the most powerful and dangerous organized crime groups the United States hasever confronted due to their sophisticated production, shipment, distribution and financial systems, and the violence and corruption theypromote everywhere they operate.



Spread of dangerous technologies: Weaponsof mass destruction pose the greatest potential threat to global stability and security. Proliferationof advanced weapons and technologies threatensto provide rogue states, terrorists andinternational crime organizations the means toinflict terrible damage on the United States, itsallies and U.S. citizens and troops abroad. Wemust continue to deter and be prepared tocounter the use or threatened use of WMD,reduce the threat posed by existing arsenals ofsuch weaponry and halt the smuggling of nuclear materials. We must identify the technical information, technologies and materials thatcannot be allowed to fall into the hands of those seeking to develop and produce WMD. And wemust stop the proliferation ofnon-safeguarded dual-use technologies thatplace these destructive capabilities in the handsof parties hostile to U.S. and global security interests.

Foreign intelligence collection: The threatfrom foreign intelligence services is more diverse,complex and difficult to counter than ever before.

Our strategy is based on three national objectives:enhancing our security, bolstering our economic prosperity and promoting democracy abroad.

Enhancing Security atHome and Abroad

Our strategy for enhancing U.S. security recognizesthat we face diverse threats requiring integrated approaches to defend the nation, shape theinternational environment, respond to crises andprepare for an uncertain future.

Threats to U.S. InterestsThe current international security environment presents a diverse set of threats to our enduringgoals and hence to our security:

Regional or State-Centered Threats: A numberof states still have the capabilities and the desireto threaten our vital interests through coercion oraggression. They continue to threaten thesovereignty of their neighbors and international access to resources. In many cases, these states are also actively improving their offensive capabilities, including efforts to obtain or retain nuclear, biological or chemical weapons and, insome cases, long-range delivery systems. InSouthwest Asia, both Iraq and Iran have thepotential to threaten their neighbors and the freeflow of oil from the region. In East Asia, NorthKorea maintains its forward positioning ofoffensive military capabilities on its border withSouth Korea.

This threat is a mix of traditional and nontraditional intelligence adversaries that havetargeted American military, diplomatic,technological and commercial secrets. Someforeign intelligence services are rapidly adoptingnew technologies and innovative methods toobtain such secrets, including attempts to use theglobal information infrastructure to gain access tosensitive information via penetration of computersystems and networks. These new methods compound the already serious threat posed bytraditional human, technical and signals intelligence activities.

Failed states: We can expect that, despite international prevention efforts, some states willbe unable to provide basic governance, servicesand opportunities for their populations, potentially generating internal conflict, humanitarian crisesor regional instability. As governments lose their ability to provide for the welfare of their citizens,mass migration, civil unrest, famine, masskillings, environmental disasters and aggression against neighboring states or ethnic groups canthreaten U.S. interests and citizens.

The Need for IntegratedApproaches

Success in countering these varied threats requiresan integrated approach that brings to bear all thecapabilities and assets needed to achieve oursecurity objectives-particularly in this era whendomestic and foreign policies are increasingly blurred.To effectively shape the international environmentand respond to the full spectrum of potential threatsand crises, diplomacy, military force, our other foreign policy tools and our domestic preparedness effortsmust be closely coordinated. We must retain astrong foreign assistance program and an effective diplomatic corps if we are to maintain American leadership. We must maintain superior military forcesat the level of readiness necessary to effectively deteraggression, conduct a wide range of peacetime activities and smaller-scale contingencies, and,preferably in concert with regional friends and allies,win two overlapping major theater wars. The successof all our foreign policy tools is critically dependent ontimely and effective intelligence collection andanalysis capabilities.

International cooperation will be vital for building security in the next century because many of thethreats we face cannot be addressed by a single nation. Globalization of transportation andcommunications has allowed international terroristsand criminals to operate without geographic constraints, while individual governments and theirlaw enforcement agencies remain limited by national boundaries. Unlike terrorists and criminals, governments must respect the sovereignty of other nations.Accordingly, a central thrust of our strategy is toenhance relationships with key nations around theworld to combat transnational threats to common interests. We seek to address these threats byincreasing intelligence and law enforcement cooperation, denying terrorists safe havens, preventing armstraders from fueling regional conflicts and subvertinginternational embargoes, and cracking down on drugtrafficking, money laundering and international crime.Building effective coalitions of like-minded nations isnot enough. We are continuing to strengthen andintegrate our own diplomatic, military, intelligence andlaw enforcement capabilities so we can act on ourown when we must as well as more effectively leadthe international community in responding to these threats.

Potential enemies, whether nations, terrorist groupsor criminal organizations, are increasingly likely toattack U.S. territory and the American people inunconventional ways. Adversaries will be tempted todisrupt our critical infrastructures, impede continuityof government operations, use weapons of massdestruction against civilians in our cities, attack uswhen we gather at special events and prey on ourcitizens overseas. The United States must act todeter or prevent such attacks and, if attacks occurs despite those efforts, must be prepared to limit thedamage they cause and respond decisively againstthe perpetrators. We will spare no effort to bring attackers to justice, ever adhering to our policy toward terrorists that "You can run, but you cannot hide," andwhere appropriate to defend ourselves by striking atterrorist bases and states that support terrorist acts.At home, we must have effective capabilities forthwarting and responding to terrorist acts, countering international crime and foreign intelligence collection,and protecting critical national infrastructures. Ourefforts to counter these threats cannot be limited exclusively to any one agency within the U.S.Government. The threats and their consequencescross agency lines, requiring close cooperationamong Federal agencies, state and local governments, the industries that own and operate critical national infrastructures, non-governmental organizations and others in the private sector.

Shaping the International Environment

The United States has a range of tools at its disposalwith which to shape the international environment inways favorable to U.S. interests and global security.Shaping activities enhance U.S. security by promoting regional security and preventing or reducing the widerange of diverse threats outlined above. These measures adapt and strengthen alliances andfriendships, maintain U.S. influence in key regionsand encourage adherence to international norms.When signs of potential conflict emerge, or potential threats appear, we undertake initiatives to prevent orreduce these threats. Our shaping efforts also aim todiscourage arms races, halt the proliferation ofweapons of mass destruction, reduce tensions incritical regions and combat the spread of international criminal organizations.

Many of our international shaping activities, often undertaken with the cooperation of our allies andfriends, also help to prevent threats from arising thatplace at risk American lives and property at home.Examples include countering terrorism, drug andfirearms trafficking, illegal immigration, the spread ofWMD and other threats. Increasingly, shaping thesecurity environment involves a wide range of Federal agencies, some of which in the past have not beenthought of as having such an international role.

Diplomacy

Diplomacy is a vital tool for countering threats to ournational security. The daily business of diplomacy conducted through our missions and representatives around the world is a irreplaceable shaping activity.These efforts are essential to sustaining our alliances,forcefully articulating U.S. interests, resolving regional disputes peacefully, averting humanitarian catastrophe, deterring aggression against the United States and our friends and allies, creating trade andinvestment opportunities for U.S. companies, andprojecting U.S. influence worldwide.One of the lessons that has been repeatedly drivenhome is the importance of preventive diplomacy indealing with conflict and complex emergencies.Helping prevent nations from failing is far moreeffective than rebuilding them after an internal crisis.Helping people stay in their homes is far morebeneficial than feeding and housing them in refugeecamps. Helping relief agencies and international organizations strengthen the institutions of conflict resolution is far less taxing than healing ethnic andsocial divisions that have already exploded intobloodshed. In short, while crisis management andcrisis resolution are necessary tasks for our foreign policy, preventive diplomacy is obviously farpreferable.

Credible military force and the demonstrated will touse it are essential to defend our vital interests andkeep America safe. But force alone cannot solve allour problems. To be most effective, force, diplomacyand our other policy tools must complement andreinforce each other-for there will be manyoccasions and many places where we must rely ondiplomatic shaping activities to protect and advanceour interests.

International Assistance

From the U.S.-led mobilization to rebuild post-warEurope to the more recent creation of export opportunities across Asia, Latin America and Africa,U.S. foreign assistance has assisted emerging democracies, helped expand free markets, slowedthe growth of international crime, contained major health threats, improved protection of theenvironment and natural resources, slowed population growth and defused humanitarian crises.Crises are averted-and U.S. preventive diplomacy actively reinforced-through U.S. sustainable development programs that promote voluntary family planning, basic education, environmental protection,democratic governance and rule of law, and theeconomic empowerment of private citizens.When combined effectively with other bilateral andmultilateral activities, such as through our cooperative scientific and technological programs, U.S. initiatives reduce the need for costly military and humanitarian interventions. Where foreign aid succeeds inconsolidating free market policies, substantial growthof American exports has frequently followed. Where crises have occurred, actions such as the GreaterHorn of Africa Initiative have helped stanch masshuman suffering and created a path out of conflictand dislocation through targeted relief. Other foreignaid programs have worked to help restore elementary security and civic institutions.

Arms Control

Arms control efforts are an essential element of ournational security strategy. Effective arms control isreally defense by other means. We pursue verifiablearms control agreements that support our efforts toprevent the spread and use of weapons of massdestruction, halt the use of conventional weapons thatcause unnecessary suffering, and contribute toregional stability at lower levels of armaments. Byincreasing transparency in the size, structure andoperations of military forces, arms control agreements and confidence-building measures reduce incentives and opportunities to initiate anattack, and reduce the mutual suspicions that arisefrom and spur on armaments competition. They helpprovide the assurance of security necessary tostrengthen cooperative relationships and direct resources to safer, more productive endeavors.

Agreements that preserve our crisis response capability shape the global and regional security environments, and simultaneously reinforce ourcommitment to allies and partners. Our arms control initiatives are an essential prevention measure forenhancing U.S. and allied security.Verifiable reductions in strategic offensive arms andthe steady shift toward less destabilizing systems remain essential to our strategy. Entry into force ofthe START I Treaty in December 1994 charted thecourse for reductions in the deployed strategic nuclear forces of the United States and the FormerSoviet Union (FSU). START I has accomplishedmuch to reduce the risk of nuclear war and strengthen international security. On the third anniversary ofSTART I entry into force, the United States andRussia announced that both were two years ahead ofschedule in meeting the treaty's mandated reductions.

Once the START II Treaty enters into force, theUnited States and Russia will each be limited tobetween 3,000-3,500 total deployed strategic nuclear warheads. START II also will eliminate destabilizingland-based multiple warhead missiles, a truly historic achievement. Russian ratification of START II willopen the door to the next round of strategic armscontrol.

At the Helsinki Summit in March 1997, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin agreed that once START II entersinto force, our two nations would immediately begin negotiations on a START III agreement. They agreedto START III guidelines that, if adopted, will cap thenumber of strategic nuclear warheads deployed ineach country at 2,000-2,500 by the end of 2007-reducing both our arsenals by 80 percent from ColdWar heights. They also agreed that START III will,for the first time, require the U.S. and Russia todestroy nuclear warheads, not just the missiles,aircraft and submarines that carry them, and openedthe door to possible reductions in non-strategic nuclear weapons. On September 26, 1997, the U.S.and Russia signed a START II Protocol codifying theagreement at Helsinki to extend the end date forreductions to 2007 and exchanged letters on early deactivation by 2003 of those strategic nuclear delivery systems to be eliminated by 2007.At Helsinki, the two Presidents recognized the NunnLugar Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Programas the vehicle through which the United States would facilitate the deactivation of strategic nuclear delivery systems in the FSU nations. The CTR Program hasassisted Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus inbecoming non-nuclear weapons states and willcontinue to assist Russia in meeting its START obligations. The program has effectively supported enhanced safety, security, accounting and centralized control measures for nuclear weapons and fissilematerials in the FSU. CTR is also assisting FSUnations in measures to eliminate and prevent theproliferation of chemical weapons and biological weapon-related capabilities. It has supported manyongoing military reductions and reform measures inthe FSU, and has contributed to a climate conducivefor further progress on non-proliferation.Also at Helsinki, the Presidents reaffirmed their commitment to the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treatyand recognized the need for effective theater missile defenses in an agreement in principle on demarcation between systems to counter strategic ballistic missiles and those to counter theater ballistic missiles. On September 26, 1997, the U.S. Secretaryof State and Russian Foreign Minister, along withtheir counterparts from Belarus, Kazakhstan andUkraine, signed or initialed five agreements relating tothe ABM Treaty. The agreements on demarcationand succession will be provided to the Senate for itsadvice and consent following Russian ratification of

START II.

By banning all nuclear test explosions for all time, theComprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) constrainsthe development of dangerous nuclear weapons,contributes to preventing nuclear proliferation and tothe process of nuclear disarmament, and enhancesthe ability of the United States to monitor suspicious nuclear activities in other countries through aworldwide sensor network and on-site inspections.Nuclear tests in India and Pakistan in May 1998 makeit more important than ever to move quickly to bringthe CTBT into force and continue establishment ofthe substantial verification mechanisms called for inthe treaty. The President has submitted the treaty,which 150 nations have signed, to the Senate andhas urged the Senate to provide its advice andconsent this year. Prompt U.S. ratification willencourage other states to ratify, enable the United States to lead the international effort to gain CTBTentry into force and strengthen international norms against nuclear testing. Multilateral and region alarms control efforts also increase U.S. and global security. We seek to strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) with a new international regime to ensure compliance. At present, we arenegotiating with other BWC member states in aneffort to reach consensus on a protocol to the BWCthat would implement an inspection system to deterand detect cheating. We are also working hard toimplement and enforce the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The United States Senate underscored the importance of these efforts with itsApril 24, 1997 decision, by a vote of 74-26, to give itsadvice and consent to ratification of the CWC. Thenext key step is legislation to implement fullcompliance with the commercial declarations andinspections that are required by the CWC.

In Europe, we are pursuing the adaptation of the 1990Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty,consistent with the Decision on Certain Basic Elements adopted in Vienna on July 23, 1997 by all30 CFE states. Success in this negotiation willensure that this landmark agreement remains acornerstone of European security into the 21 centuryand beyond. We continue to seek Russian, Ukrainianand Belarusian ratification of the 1992 Open Skies Treaty to increase transparency of military forces inEurasia and North America. We also promote,through international organizations such as theOrganization for Security and Cooperation in Europe(OSCE), implementation of confidence and security building measures, including the 1994 Vienna Document, throughout Europe and in specific regionsof tension and instability-even where we are notformal parties to such agreements. The agreements mandated by the Dayton Accords demonstrate howinnovative regional efforts can strengthen stability andreduce conflicts that could adversely affect U.S.interests abroad.

President Clinton is committed to ending the tragic damage to innocent civilians due to anti-personnellandmines (APLs). The United States has alreadytaken major steps in the spirit that motivated theOttawa Convention, while ensuring our ability to meetinternational obligations and provide for the safetyand security of our men and women in uniform. OnJune 30, 1998, we met-one year ahead ofschedule-the President's May 1996 commitment todestroy all of our non-self-destructing APLs by 1999,except those we need for Korea and deminingtraining. To expand and strengthen theAdministration policy on APLs that he announced onSeptember 17, 1997, President Clinton signed Presidential Decision Directive 64 in June 1998. Itdirects the Defense Department to end the use of allAPLs, even of self-destructing APLs, outside Koreaby 2003 and to pursue aggressively the objective ofhaving APL alternatives ready for Korea by 2006. Wewill also aggressively pursue alternatives to our mixedanti-tank systems that contain anti-personnelsubmunitions. We have made clear that the United States will sign the Ottawa Convention by 2006 if wesucceed in identifying and fielding suitable alternatives to our self-destructing APLs and mixedanti-tank systems by then. Furthermore, in 1997 theAdministration submitted for Senate advice andconsent the Amended Landmine Protocol to theConvention on Conventional Weapons, which bansthe unmarked, long-duration APLs that caused theworldwide humanitarian problem. We haveestablished a permanent ban on APL exports and areseeking to universalize an export ban through theConference on Disarmament in Geneva. In 1998 weare spending $80 million on humanitarian deminingprograms, more than double that of the previous year,and through our "Demining 2010" initiative havechallenged the world to increase the effectivenessand efficiency of removing landmines that threaten civilians.

Nonproliferation Initiatives

Nonproliferation initiatives enhance global security bypreventing the spread of WMD, materials forproducing them and means of delivering them. Thatis why the Administration is promoting universal adherence to the international treaty regimes thatprohibit the acquisition of weapons of massdestruction, including the Nuclear Non-ProliferationTreaty (NPT), the CWC and the BWC. The NPT wasan indispensable precondition for the denuclearizationof Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus and South Africa.

We also seek to strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system andachieve a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty to cap thenuclear materials available for weapons. Acoordinated effort by the intelligence community andlaw enforcement agencies to detect, prevent anddeter illegal trafficking in fissile materials is alsoessential to our counter-proliferation efforts.The Administration also seeks to prevent destabilizing buildups of conventional arms and limit access tosensitive technical information, equipment andtechnologies by strengthening multilateral regimes,including the Wassenaar Arrangement on ExportControls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goodsand Technologies, the Australia Group (for chemicaland biological weapons), the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and the Nuclear SuppliersGroup. We are working to harmonize national export control policies, increase information sharing, refine control lists and expand cooperation against illicit transfers.

Through programs such as the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program and otherinitiatives, we aim to strengthen controls overweapons-usable fissile material and prevent the theftor diversion of WMD and related material andtechnology. We are working to strengthen theConvention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material to increase accountability and protection,which complements our effort to enhance IAEAsafeguards. We are purchasing tons of highly enriched uranium from dismantled Russian nuclear weapons for conversion into commercial reactor fuel,and working with Russia to redirect former Soviet facilities and scientists from military to peaceful purposes.

To expand and improve U.S. efforts aimed atdeterring proliferation of WMD by organized crime groups and individuals in the NIS and Eastern Europe, the Defense Department and FBI are

Regional nonproliferation efforts are particularly important in three critical proliferation zones. On theKorean Peninsula, we are implementing the 1994Agreed Framework, which requires full compliance byNorth Korea with nonproliferation obligations. In theMiddle East and Southwest Asia, we encourage regional arms control agreements that address thelegitimate security concerns of all parties andcontinue efforts to thwart and roll back Iran'sdevelopment of weapons of mass destruction andIraq's efforts to reconstitute its programs. In SouthAsia, we seek to persuade India and Pakistan to bringtheir nuclear and missile programs into conformitywith international nonproliferation standards and tosign and ratify the CTBT.

implementing a joint counter proliferation assistance program that provides appropriate training, materialand services to law enforcement agencies in theseareas. The program's objectives are to assist inestablishing a professional cadre of law enforcement personnel in these nations trained to prevent, deterand investigate crimes related to the proliferation anddiversion of WMD or their delivery systems; to assistthese countries in developing laws and regulations designed to prevent the illicit acquisition or traffickingof WMD, and in establishing appropriate enforcement mechanisms; and to build a solid legal andorganization framework that will enable these governments to attack the proliferation problem athome and participate effectively in international efforts.

Military Activities

The U.S. military plays an essential role in buildingcoalitions and shaping the international environmentin ways that protect and promote U.S. interests.Through overseas presence and peacetime engagement activities such as defense cooperation,security assistance, and training and exercises withallies and friends, our armed forces help to deteraggression and coercion, promote regional stability,prevent and reduce conflicts and threats, and serveas role models for militaries in emerging democracies. These important efforts engage every component of the Total Force: Active, Reserve,National Guard and civilian.

Deterrence of aggression and coercion on a dailybasis is crucial. Our ability to deter potential adversaries in peacetime rests on several factors,particularly on our demonstrated will and ability touphold our security commitments when they arechallenged. We have earned this reputation throughboth our declaratory policy, which clearlycommunicates costs to potential adversaries, and ourcredible warfighting capability. This capability isembodied in ready forces and equipment strategically stationed or deployed forward, in forces in the United States at the appropriate level of readiness to deployand go into action when needed, in our ability to gaintimely access to critical regions and infrastructure overseas, and in our demonstrated ability to form andlead effective military coalitions.

Our nuclear deterrent posture is one of the mostvisible and important examples of how U.S. military capabilities can be used effectively to deteraggression and coercion, as reaffirmed in aPresidential Decision Directive signed by President Clinton in November 1997. Nuclear weapons serveas a hedge against an uncertain future, a guaranteeof our security commitments to allies and adisincentive to those who would contemplate developing or otherwise acquiring their own nuclear weapons. Our military planning for the possible employment of U.S. nuclear weapons is focused ondeterring a nuclear war rather than attempting to fightand win a protracted nuclear exchange. We continueto emphasize the survivability of the nuclear systemsand infrastructure necessary to endure a preemptive attack and still respond at overwhelming levels. TheUnited States must continue to maintain a robust triadof strategic forces sufficient to deter any hostile foreign leadership with access to nuclear forces andto convince it that seeking a nuclear advantage wouldbe futile. We must also ensure the continued viabilityof the infrastructure that supports U.S. nuclear forcesand weapons. The Stockpile Stewardship Programwill guarantee the safety and reliability of our nuclear weapons under the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.While our overall deterrence posture-nuclear andconventional-has been effective against mostpotential adversaries, a range of terrorist and criminal organizations may not be deterred by traditional deterrent threats. For these actors to be deterred,they must believe that any type of attack against theUnited States or its citizens will be attributed to themand that we will respond effectively and decisively toprotect our national interests and ensure that justiceis done.

Our military promotes regional stability in numerousways. In Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia,where the U.S. has clear, vital interests, the American military helps assure the security of our allies andfriends. The reinforcement of U.S. forces in the Gulffrom Fall 1997 to Spring 1998 clearly illustrates theimportance of military power in achieving U.S.national security objectives and stabilizing apotentially volatile situation. The U.S. buildup made itclear to Saddam Hussein that he must comply withUN sanctions and cease hindering UNSCOMinspections or face dire consequences. Italso denied him the option of moving to threaten hisneighbors, as he had done in past confrontations withthe international community. Saddam's agreement toopen the so-called "presidential sites" to UNinspection was a significant step toward ensuring thatIraq's WMD have been eradicated. It would not havebeen achieved without American diplomacy backedby force. Our decision maintain a higher continuousforce level in the Gulf than we had before this mostrecent confrontation with Iraq will help deter Saddamfrom making further provocations and strengthen theresolve of our coalition partners in the Gulf.

We are continuing to adapt and strengthen ouralliances and coalitions to meet the challenges of anevolving security environment. U.S. military forces prevent and reduce a wide range of potential conflictsin key regions. An example of such an activity is ourdeployment to the Former Yugoslav Republic ofMacedonia to help prevent the spread of violence tothat country. We assist other countries in improvingtheir pertinent military capabilities, including peacekeeping and humanitarian response. Withcountries that are neither staunch friends nor knownfoes, military cooperation often serves as a positivemeans of engagement, building security relationshipstoday that will contribute to improved relations tomorrow.

Our armed forces also serve as a role model formilitaries in emerging democracies around the world.Our 200-year history of strong civilian control of themilitary serves as an example to those countries withhistories of non-democratic governments. Through military-to-military activities and increasing links between the U.S. military and the military establishments of Partnership for Peace nations, forinstance, we are helping to transform military institutions in Central and Eastern Europe, as well asin the Newly Independent States of the former SovietUnion.

International Law Enforcement Cooperation

As threats to our national security from drugtrafficking, terrorism and international crime increase,development of working relations U.S. and foreignlaw enforcement and judicial agencies will play a vitalrole in shaping law enforcement priorities in those countries. Law enforcement agencies must continueto find innovative ways to develop a concerted, global attack on the spread of international crime.Overseas law enforcement presence leveragesresources and fosters the establishment of effective working relationships with foreign law enforcement agencies. U.S. investigators and prosecutors drawupon their experience and background to enlist thecooperation of foreign law enforcement officials,keeping crime away from American shores, enablingthe arrest of many U.S. fugitives and solving seriousU.S. crimes. This presence develops substantive international links by creating personal networks oflaw enforcement professionals dedicated to bringing international criminals to justice.

In addition, training foreign law enforcement officersis critical to combating international crime. Suchtraining helps create professional law enforcement organizations and builds citizen confidence in lawenforcement officers, who understand and operateunder the rule of law. Training also builds a common perspective and understanding of investigative techniques that helps shape international lawenforcement priorities. The FBI and other federal lawenforcement agencies have provided extensive lawenforcement training at the International LawEnforcement Academy in Budapest, Hungary andelsewhere around the world. This training has provedto be enormously effective in developing professionallaw enforcement and security services in emerging democracies.

Environmental Initiatives

Decisions today regarding the environment andnatural resources can affect our security forgenerations. Environmental threats do not heednational borders and can pose long-term dangers toour security and well-being. Natural resourcescarcities can trigger and exacerbate conflict.Environmental threats such as climate change, ozonedepletion and the transnational movement ofhazardous chemicals and waste directly threaten thehealth of U.S. citizens.

We have a full diplomatic agenda, working bilaterallyand multilaterally to respond aggressively toenvironmental threats. The Global EnvironmentalFacility (GEF) is an important instrument for thiscooperation. With 161 member nations, the GEF isspecifically focused on reducing cross-borderenvironmental damage. Our Environmental Security

13

Initiative joins U.S. agencies with foreign partners toaddress regional environmental concerns and thereby reduce the risk to U.S. interests abroad. We havealso undertaken development of an environmental forecasting system to provide U.S. policymakers advance warning of environmental stress situationswhich have the potential for significant impact on U.S.interests.

At Kyoto in December 1997, the industrialized nationsof the world agreed for the first time to binding limitson greenhouse gases. The agreement is strong andcomprehensive, covering the six greenhouse gaseswhose concentrations are increasing due to human activity. It reflects the commitment of the United States to use the tools of the free market to tacklethis problem. It will enhance growth and create newincentives for the rapid development of technologies through a system of joint implementation andemissions trading. The Kyoto agreement was a vital turning point, but we still have a lot of hard workahead. We must press for meaningful participationby key developing nations. Multilateral negotiationsare underway and we will pursue bilateral talks withkey developing nations. We will not submit the Kyoto agreement for ratifica-tion until key developing nations have agreed to participate meaningfully inefforts to address global warming.

negotiate an international agreement to bantwelve persistent organic pollutants, includingsuch hazardous chemicals as DDT;

promote environment-related scientific researchin other countries so they can better identify environmental problems and develop indigenous solutions for them;

increase international cooperation in fightingtransboundary environmental crime, including trafficking in protected flora and fauna, hazardous waste and ozone-depleting chemicals;

ratify the Biodiversity Convention and take stepsto prevent biodiversity loss, including support foragricultural research to relieve pressures onforests, working with multilateral developmentbanks and others to prevent biodiversity loss inkey regions, and use of the Convention onInternational Trade in Endangered Species toprotect threatened species; andcontinue to work with the Nordic countries andRussia to mitigate nuclear and non-nuclear pollution in the Arctic, and continue to encourage Russia to develop sound management practicesfor nuclear materials and radioactive waste.

Additionally, we seek to accomplish the following:

achieve increased compliance with the Montreal Protocol through domestic and multilateral effortsaimed at curbing illegal trade in ozone depletingsubstances;



ratify the Law of the Sea Convention, implementthe UN Straddling Stocks Agreement and help topromote sustainable management of fisheries worldwide;



implement the Program of Action on population growth developed at the 1994 Cairo Conference,lead a renewed global effort to address population problems and promote international consensus forstabilizing world population growth;expand bilateral forest assistance programs andpromote sustainable management of tropical forests;

achieve Senate ratification of the Convention toCombat Desertification;

Responding to Threats andCrises

Because our shaping efforts alone cannot guaranteethe international security environment we seek, theUnited States must be able to respond at home andabroad to the full spectrum of threats and crises thatmay arise. Our resources are finite, so we must beselective in our responses, focusing on challengesthat most directly affect our interests and engagingwhere we can make the most difference. Ourresponse might be diplomatic, economic, lawenforcement, or military in nature-or, more likely,some combination of the above. We must use themost appropriate tool or combination of tools-actingin alliance or partnership when our interests areshared by others, but unilaterally when compelling national interests so demand. At home, we mustforge an effective partnership of Federal, state andlocal government agencies, industry and other private sector organizations.

When efforts to deter an adversary-be it a rogue nation, terrorist group or criminal organization-occurin the context of a crisis, they become the leadingedge of crisis response. In this sense, deterrencestraddles the line between shaping the international environment and responding to crises. Deterrence incrisis generally involves signaling the United States'commitment to a particular country or interest byenhancing our warfighting capability in the theater.Forces in or near the theater may be moved closer tothe crisis and other forces rapidly deployed to thearea. The U.S. may also choose to make additional statements to communicate the costs of aggressionor coercion to an adversary, and in some cases maychoose to employ U.S. forces to underline themessage and deter further adventurism.The American people rightfully play a central role inhow the United States wields its power abroad. TheUnited States cannot long sustain a commitment without the support of the public, and close consultations with Congress are important in thiseffort. When it is judged in America's interest tointervene, we must remain clear in purpose andresolute in execution.

Transnational Threats

Today, American diplomats, law enforcement officials, military personnel, members of theintelligence community and others are increasingly called upon to respond to growing transnational threats, particularly terrorism, drug trafficking andinternational organized crime.

Terrorism

To meet the growing challenge of terrorism, President Clinton signed Presidential Decision Directive 62 inMay 1998. This Directive creates a new and moresystematic approach to fighting the terrorist threat ofthe next century. It reinforces the mission of themany U.S. agencies charged with roles in defeating terrorism; it also codifies and clarifies their activities inthe wide range of U.S. counter-terrorism programs,including apprehension and prosecution of terrorists,increasing transportation security, and enhancing incident response capabilities. The Directive will helpachieve the President's goal of ensuring that we meetthe threat of terrorism in the 21 century.

Our policy to counter international terrorists rests onthe following principles: (1) make no concessions toterrorists; (2) bring all pressure to bear on all state sponsors of terrorism; (3) fully exploit all availablelegal mechanisms to punish international terrorists;and (4) help other governments improve their capabilities to combat terrorism. Following these principles, we seek to uncover and eliminate foreign terrorists and their support networks in our country;eliminate terrorist sanctuaries; and counter state supported terrorism and subversion of moderate regimes through a comprehensive program ofdiplomatic, law enforcement, economic, military andintelligence activities. We are working to improve aviation security at airports in the United States andworldwide, to ensure better security for all U.S.transportation systems, and to improve protection forour personnel assigned overseas.

Countering terrorism effectively requires day-to-daycoordination within the U.S. Government and close cooperation with other governments and international organizations. Foreign terrorists will not be allowed toenter the United States, and the full force of legal authorities will be used to remove foreign terroristsfrom the United States and prevent fundraising withinthe United States to support foreign terrorist activity.We have seen positive results from the increasing integration of intelligence, diplomatic, military and lawenforcement activities among the Departments ofState, Justice, Defense, Treasury, Energy,Transportation, the CIA and other intelligence agencies. The Administration is working withCongress to increase the ability of these agencies tocombat terrorism through augmented funding andmanpower.

The United States has made concerted efforts todeter and punish terrorists and remains determined toapprehend and bring to justice those who terrorize American citizens. In January 1998, the United States signed the International Convention for theSuppression of Terrorist Bombings. The Conventionfills an important gap in international law byexpanding the legal framework for international cooperation in the investigation, prosecution andextradition of persons who engage in such bombings.Whenever possible, we use law enforcement anddiplomatic tools to wage the fight against terrorism.But there have been, and will be, times when lawenforcement and diplomatic tools are simply notenough, when our very national security ischallenged, and when we must take extraordinarysteps to protect the safety of our citizens. As long asterrorists continue to target American citizens, wereserve the right to act in self defense by striking attheir bases and those who sponsor, assist or actively support them. We exercised that right in 1993 withthe attack against Iraqi intelligence headquarters inresponse to Baghdad's assassination attempt against former President Bush. We exercised that right againin August 1998.

On August 7, 1998, 12 Americans and nearly 300Kenyans and Tanzanians lost their lives, and another5,000 were wounded when our embassies in Nairobiand Dar es Salaam were bombed. Soon afterward,our intelligence community acquired convincing information from a variety of reliable sources that thenetwork of radical groups affiliated with Osama binLaden, perhaps the preeminent organizer andfinancier of international terrorism in the world today,planned, financed and carried out the bombings. Thegroups associated with bin Laden come from diverse places, but share a hatred for democracy, a fanaticalglorification of violence and a horrible distortion oftheir religion to justify the murder of innocents. Theyhave made the United States their adversary precisely because of what we stand for and what westand against.

On August 20, 1998, our Armed Forces carried outstrikes against terrorist facilities and infrastructure inAfghanistan. Our forces targeted one of the mostactive terrorist bases in the world. It contained keyelements of the bin Laden network's infrastructureand has served as a training camp for literally thousands of terrorists from around the globe. Ourforces also attacked a factory in Sudan associatedwith the bin Laden network that was involved in theproduction of materials for chemical weapons. Thestrikes were a necessary and proportionate responseto the imminent threat of further terrorist attacks against U.S. personnel and facilities. Afghanistanand Sudan had been warned for years to stopharboring and supporting these terrorist groups.Countries that persistently host terrorists have noright to be safe havens.

Placing terrorism at the top of the diplomatic agendahas increased international information sharing andlaw enforcement efforts. At the June 1997 DenverSummit of the Eight, the leaders of Canada, France,Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdomand the United States reaffirmed their determinationto combat terrorism in all forms, their opposition toconcessions to terrorist demands and their determination to deny hostage-takers any benefits from theiracts. They agreed to intensify diplomatic efforts toensure that by the year 2000 all States have joinedthe international counterterrorism conventions specified in the 1996 UN resolution on measures tocounter terrorism. The eight leaders also agreed tostrengthen the capability of hostage negotiation experts and counterterrorism response units, toexchange information on technologies to detect anddeter the use of weapons of mass destruction interrorist attacks, to develop means to deter terrorist attacks on electronic and computer infrastructure, tostrengthen maritime security, to exchange information on security practices for international special events, and to strengthen and expand international cooperation and consultation on terrorism.

International Crime

International crime is a serious and potent threat tothe American people at home and abroad. Drugtrafficking, illegal trade in firearms, financial crimes-such as money laundering, counterfeiting, advancedfee and credit card fraud, and income tax evasion-illegal alien smuggling, trafficking in women andchildren, economic espionage, intellectual propertytheft, computer hacking and public corruption are alllinked to international criminal activity and all have adirect impact on the security and prosperity of theAmerican people.

Efforts to combat international crime can have amuch broader impact than simply halting individual criminal acts. The efficiency of the market place depends on transparency and effective lawenforcement, which limit distorting factors such asextortion and corruption. A free and efficient market implies not only the absence of state control but alsolimits on unlawful activities that impede rational business decisions and fair competition. Additionally,the integrity and reliability of the international financial system will be improved by standardizing laws andregulations governing financial institutions andimproving international law enforcement cooperationin the financial sector.

To address the increasing threat from these diverse criminal activities, we have formulated anInternational Crime Control Strategy that provides aframework for integrating the federal government response to international crime. The strategy's majorgoals and initiatives are to:

Extend our crime control efforts beyond U.S.borders by intensifying activities of lawenforcement and diplomatic personnel abroad toprevent criminal acts and prosecute select criminal acts committed abroad.

Protect U.S. borders by enhancing our inspection,detection, monitoring and interdiction efforts,seeking stiffer criminal penalties for smuggling,and targeting law enforcement resources moreeffectively against smugglers.

Deny safe haven to international criminals bynegotiating new international agreements forevidence sharing and prompt arrest andextradition of fugitives (including nationals of therequested country), implementing strengthened immigration laws to prevent criminals fromentering the United States and provide for their prompt expulsion when appropriate, andpromoting increased cooperation with foreign lawenforcement authorities.

Counter international financial crime bycombating money laundering and reducing movement of criminal proceeds, seizing theassets of international criminals, enhancing bilateral and multilateral cooperation against financial crime, and targeting offshore sources ofinternational fraud, counterfeiting, electronic access device schemes, income tax evasion andother financial crimes.

Prevent criminal exploitation of international tradeby interdicting illegal technology exports, preventing unfair and predatory trade practices, protecting intellectual property rights, countering industrial theft and economic espionage, and enforcing import restrictions on harmful substances,dangerous organisms and protected species. Infiscal year 1997, the Customs Service seized $59million in goods and $55 million in currency beingtaken out of the country illegally.

Respond to emerging international crime threatsby disrupting new activities of international organized crime groups, enhancing intelligence efforts, reducing trafficking in human beings(involuntary servitude, alien smuggling, documentfraud and denial of human rights), crimes against children, and increasing enforcement efforts against high technology and computer-relatedcrime.

Foster international cooperation and the rule oflaw by establishing international standards, goalsand objectives to combat international crime andby actively encouraging compliance, improving bilateral cooperation with foreign governmentsand law enforcement authorities, expanding U.S.training and assistance programs in lawenforcement and administration of justice, andstrengthening the rule of law as the foundation fordemocratic government and free markets.

The growing threat to our security from transnationalcrime makes international law enforcement cooperation vital. We are negotiating and implementing updated extradition and mutual legal assistance treatiesthat reflect the changing nature of international crimeand prevent terrorists and criminals from exploiting national borders to escape prosecution. Moreover,since the primary motivation of most international criminals is greed, powerful asset seizure, forfeitureand money laundering laws are key tools for taking action against the financial underpinnings of international crime. Increasing our enforcement powers through bilateral and multilateral agreements andefforts makes it harder for criminals to enjoy their illgotten gains.At the Birmingham Summit in May 1998, the leadersof the G-8 adopted a wide range of measures tostrengthen the cooperative efforts against international crime that they launched at their summitin Lyon two years ago. They agreed to increase cooperation on transnational high technology crime,money laundering and financial crime, corruption,environmental crimes, and trafficking in drugs,firearms and women and children. They also agreedto fully support negotiations on a UN Convention onTransnational Organized Crime, which will broadenmany of the efforts underway among the G-8 to therest of the international community.

No area of criminal activity has greater international implications than high technology crime because ofthe global nature of information networks. Computerhackers and other cyber-criminals are not hamperedby international boundaries, since information andtransactions involving funds or property can betransmitted quickly and covertly via telephone andinformation systems. Law enforcement faces difficult challenges in this area, many of which are impossibleto address without international consensus andcooperation. We seek to develop and implement newagreements with other nations to address hightechnology crime, particularly cyber-crime.

We are making a concerted effort at home andabroad to shut down the illicit trade in firearms,ammunition and explosives that fuels the violence associated with terrorism, drug trafficking andinternational crime. The President has signed legislation amending the Arms Export Control Act toexpand our authority to monitor and regulate theactivities of arms brokers and we have intensified reviews of applications for licenses to export firearmsfrom the United States to ensure that they are notdiverted to illicit purposes. The Bureau of Alcohol,Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) has tightened up proofof residency requirements for aliens purchasing firearms from dealers in the United States, and ATFand the Customs Service have intensified their interdiction and investigative efforts at U.S. borders.In the international arena, the United States isworking with its partners in the G-8 and through theUN Crime Commission to expand cooperation oncombating illicit arms trafficking. In November 1997,the United States and its partners in the Organizationof American States (OAS) signed the Inter-American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of andTrafficking in Firearms-the first international agreement designed to prevent, combat anderadicate illegal trafficking in firearms, ammunitionand explosives. We are now negotiating aninternational agreement that would globalize the OASconvention. Additionally, the ATF and Customs Service have provided training and assistance toother nations on tracing firearms, combating internal smuggling and related law enforcement topics.

Drug Trafficking

We have shown that with determined and relentless efforts, we can make significant progress against thescourge of drug abuse and drug trafficking. In theUnited States, drug use has dropped 49 percentsince 1979. Recent studies show that drug use byour young people is stabilizing, and in somecategories, declining. Overall, cocaine use hasdropped 70 percent since 1985 and the crack epidemic has begun to recede. Today, Americansspend 37 percent less on drugs than a decade ago.That means over $34 billion reinvested in our society,rather than squandered on drugs.

The aim of the U.S. National Drug Control Strategy isto cut drug availability in the United States by halfover the next 10 years-and reduce theconsequences of drug use and trafficking by 25percent over the same period-through expanded prevention efforts, improved treatment programs,strengthened law enforcement and tougherinterdiction. Our strategy recognizes that, at homeand abroad, prevention, treatment and economic alternatives must be integrated with intelligence collection, law enforcement and interdiction. Itsultimate success will require concerted efforts by thepublic, all levels of government and the private sector together with other governments, private groups andinternational organizations.

Domestically, we seek to educate and enable America's youth to reject illegal drugs, increase thesafety of America's citizens by substantially reducingdrug-related crime and violence, reduce health andsocial costs to the public of illegal drug use, andshield America's air, land and sea frontiers from thedrug threat. Working with Congress and the private sector, the Administration has launched a majorantidrug youth media campaign and will seek toextend this program through 2002. Withcongressional support and matching dollars from theprivate sector, we will commit to a five-year, $2 billion public-private partnership to educate our children toreject drugs.

In concert with our allies abroad, we seek to stopdrug trafficking by reducing cultivation of drugproducing crops, interdicting the flow of drugs at thesource and in transit (particularly in Central and South America, the Caribbean, Mexico and Southeast Asia),and stopping drugs from entering our country. TheStrategy includes efforts to strengthen democratic institutions and root out corruption in source nations,prosecute major international drug traffickers anddestroy trafficking organizations, prevent money laundering and use of commercial air and maritime transportation for drug smuggling, and eradicate illegal drug crops and encourage alternate cropdevelopment or alternative employment in source nations. We seek to achieve a counterdrug alliancein this hemisphere, one that could serve as a modelfor enhanced cooperation in other regions.

The United States is aggressively engaging international organizations, financial institutions andnon-governmental organizations in counternarcoticscooperation. At the Birmingham Summit in May1998, the leaders of the G-8 endorsed the principle ofshared responsibility for combating drugs, including cooperative efforts focused on both eradication anddemand reduction. They agreed to reinforce cooperation on reducing demand and curbing trafficking in drugs and chemical precursors. Theyalso agreed on the need for a global strategy toeradicate illicit drugs. The United States supports theUN International Drug Control Program's goal ofdramatically reducing coca and opium poppycultivation by 2008 and the program's efforts tocombat drug production, trafficking and abuse insome of the most remote regions of the world. At theUN General Assembly Special Session on drugtrafficking and abuse in June 1998, President Clintonand other world leaders strengthened existing international counterdrug institutions, reconfirmed theglobal partnership against drug abuse and stressedthe need for a coordinated international approach tocombating drug trafficking.

Emerging Threats at Home

Due to our military superiority, potential enemies,whether nations or terrorist groups, may be morelikely in the future to resort to terrorist acts or otherattacks against vulnerable civilian targets in theUnited States instead of conventional military operations. At the same time, easier access tosophisticated technology means that the destructivepower available to terrorists is greater than ever.Adversaries may thus be tempted to useunconventional tools, such as WMD or information attacks, to threaten our citizens, and critical national infrastructures.

Managing the Consequences of WMDIncidents

Presidential Decision Directive 62, signed in May1998, established an overarching policy andassignment of responsibilities for responding toterrorist acts involving WMD. The Federal Government will respond rapidly and decisively to anyterrorist incident in the United States, working withstate and local governments to restore order anddeliver emergency assistance. The Department ofJustice, acting through the FBI, has the overall lead inoperational response to a WMD incident. TheFederal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)supports the FBI in preparing for and responding tothe consequences of a WMD incident.

The Domestic Terrorism Program is integrating thecapabilities and assets of a number of Federal agencies to support the FBI, FEMA and state andlocal governments in consequence management.The program's goal is to build a capability in 120major U.S. cities for first responders to be able todeal with WMD incidents by 2002. In fiscal year1997, the Defense Department provided training tonearly 1,500 metropolitan emergency responders-firefighters, law enforcement officials and medical personnel-in four cities. In fiscal year 1998, theprogram will reach 31 cities. Eventually, this trainingwill reach all cities via the Internet, video and CDROM.

Under the Domestic Terrorism Program, the Defense Department will maintain military units to serve asaugmentation forces for weapons of mass destruction consequence management and to help maintain proficiency of local emergency responders through periodic training and exercises. The National Guard,with its mission and long tradition of responding tonational emergencies, has an important role to play inthis effort. The President announced in May 1998that the Defense Department will train Army NationalGuard and reserve elements to assist state and local authorities to manage the consequences of a WMDattack. This training will be given to units inMassachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Georgia,Illinois, Texas, Missouri, Colorado, California andWashington.

The Domestic Terrorism Program enlists the supportof other agencies as well. The Department of Energyplans for and provides emergency responder trainingfor nuclear and radiological incidents. TheEnvironmental Protection Agency plans for andprovides emergency responder training for hazardous materials and environmental incidents. TheDepartment of Health and Human Services, throughthe Public Health Service and with the support of theDepartment of Veterans Affairs and other Federal agencies, plans and prepares for a national responseto medical emergencies arising from the terrorist useof weapons of mass destruction.

The threat of biological weapons is particularly troubling. In his May 1998 commencement speech atAnnapolis, the President announced acomprehensive strategy to protect our civilian population from the scourge of biological weapons.There are four critical areas of focus:

First, if a hostile nation or terrorists release bacteria or viruses to harm Americans, we mustbe able to identify the pathogens with speed andcertainty. We will upgrade our public health andmedical surveillance systems. These improvements will benefit not only ourpreparedness for a biological weapons attack-they will enhance our ability to respond quicklyand effectively to outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases.

Second, our emergency response personnelmust have the training and equipment to do theirjobs right. As described above, we will helpensure that federal, state and local authoritieshave the resources and knowledge they need todeal with a crisis.

Third, we must have the medicines and vaccines needed to treat those who fall sick or preventthose at risk from falling ill because of a biological weapons attack. The President will propose thecreation of a civilian stockpile of medicines andvaccines to counter the pathogens most likely tobe in the hands of terrorists or hostile powers.

Fourth, the revolution in biotechnology offers enormous possibilities for combating biological weapons. We will coordinate research anddevelopment efforts to use the advances ingenetic engineering and biotechnology to createthe next generation of medicines, vaccines anddiagnostic tools for use against these weapons.At the same time, we must continue our efforts toprevent biotechnology innovations from being applied to development of ever more difficult tocounter biological weapons.

Protecting Critical Infrastructures

Our military power and national economy areincreasingly reliant upon interdependent critical infrastructures-the physical and information systems essential to the operations of the economy andgovernment. They include telecommunications,energy, banking and finance, transportation, watersystems and emergency services. It has long beenthe policy of the United States to assure the continuityand viability of these critical infrastructures. Butadvances in information technology and competitive pressure to improve efficiency and productivity havecreated new vulnerabilities to both physical andinformation attacks as these infrastructures havebecome increasingly automated and interlinked. If wedo not implement adequate protective measures,attacks on our critical infrastructures and information systems by nations, groups or individuals might becapable of significantly harming our military powerand economy.

To enhance our ability to protect these critical infrastructures, the President signed Presidential Decision Directive 63 in May 1998. This directivemakes it U.S. policy to take all necessary measuresto swiftly eliminate any significant vulnerability tophysical or information attacks on our critical infrastructures, especially our information systems.We will achieve and maintain the ability to protectthem from intentional acts that would significantly diminish the abilities of the Federal Government toperform essential national security missions and toensure the general public health and safety. We willprotect the ability of state and local governments tomaintain order and to deliver minimum essential public services. And we will work with the private sector to ensure the orderly functioning of theeconomy and the delivery of essential telecommunications, energy, financial andtransportation services. Any interruption ormanipulation of these critical functions must be brief,infrequent, manageable, isolated and minimallydetrimental to the welfare of the United States.The National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC)integrates relevant federal, state, and local government entities as well as the private sector, andprovides the national focal point for gathering information on threats to the infrastructures. It servesas a national resource for identifying and assessing threats, warning about vulnerabilities, and conducting criminal investigations. The NIPC will also coordinatethe federal government's response to an incident,including mitigation, investigation and monitoring reconstruction efforts.

Smaller-Scale Contingencies

Smaller-scale contingency operations encompass thefull range of military operations short of major theaterwarfare, including humanitarian assistance, peace operations, enforcing embargoes and no-fly zones,evacuating U.S. citizens, reinforcing key allies, andlimited strikes and intervention. These operations willlikely pose the most frequent challenge for U.S.forces and cumulatively require significant commitments over time. These operations will alsoput a premium on the ability of the U.S. military towork closely and effectively with other U.S.Government agencies, non-governmental organizations, regional and international security organizations and coalition partners.

Under certain circumstances the U.S. military mayprovide appropriate and necessary humanitarian assistance. Those circumstances are when a naturalor manmade disaster dwarfs the ability of the normal relief agencies to respond or the need for relief isurgent, and the military has a unique ability torespond quickly with minimal risk to American lives.In these cases, the United States may intervene whenthe costs and risks are commensurate with thestakes involved and when there is reason to believethat our action can make a real difference. Suchefforts by the United States and the international community will be limited in duration, have a clearly defined end state and be designed to give theaffected country the opportunity to restore its ownbasic services. This policy recognizes that the U.S.military normally is not the best tool for addressinglong-term humanitarian concerns and that, ultimately,responsibility for the fate of a nation rests with its ownpeople.

At times it will be in our national interest to proceed inpartnership with others to preserve, maintain andrestore peace. American participation in peace operations takes many forms, such as the NATO-ledcoalition in Bosnia, the American-led UN force inHaiti, the Military Observer Mission Ecuador and Peru(MOMEP), and our participation in the multilateral coalition operation in the Sinai. The question ofcommand and control in multinational contingency operations is particularly critical. Under nocircumstances will the President ever relinquish hisconstitutionally mandated command authority overU.S. forces, but there may be times when it is in ourinterest to place U.S. forces under the temporary operational control of a competent allied or United Nations commander.

Not only must the U.S. military be prepared tosuccessfully conduct multiple smaller-scale contingencies worldwide, it must be prepared to do soin the face of challenges such as terrorism,information operations and the threat or use ofweapons of mass destruction. U.S. forces must alsoremain prepared to withdraw from contingency operations if needed to deploy to a major theater war.Accordingly, appropriate U.S. forces will be kept at ahigh level of readiness and will be trained, equippedand organized to be multi-mission capable.

Major Theater Warfare

Fighting and winning major theater wars is theultimate test of our Total Force-a test at which itmust always succeed. For the foreseeable future, theUnited States, preferably in concert with allies, mustremain able to deter and defeat large-scale, cross border aggression in two distant theaters inoverlapping time frames. Maintaining such acapability deters opportunism elsewhere while we areheavily committed to deterring or defeating aggression in one theater, or while conducting multiple smaller-scale contingencies and engagement activities in other theaters. It also provides a hedge against the possibility that we might encounter threats larger or more difficult than we expected. A strategyfor deterring and defeating aggression in two theaters ensures we maintain the capability and flexibility tomeet unknown future threats, while continued global engagement helps preclude such threats fromdeveloping.

Fighting and winning major theater wars entails atleast three particularly challenging requirements.First, we must maintain the ability to rapidly defeat initial enemy advances short of enemy objectives intwo theaters, in close succession. The United Statesmust maintain this ability to ensure that we can seizethe initiative, minimize territory lost before an invasionis halted and ensure the integrity of our warfightingcoalitions. To meet this challenge, the forces thatwould be first to respond to an act of aggression arekept at full readiness, and the forces that follow themare kept at a level that supports their being ready todeploy and go into action when called for in theoperations plan for the contingency.Second, the United States must plan and prepare tofight and win under conditions where an adversarymay use asymmetric means against us-unconventional approaches that avoid or undermineour strengths while exploiting our vulnerabilities. Thisis of particular importance and a significant challenge.Because of our dominance in the conventional military arena, adversaries who challenge the United States are likely to use asymmetric means, such asWMD, information operations or terrorism.

The WMD threat to our forces is receiving the special attention it deserves. We are enhancing thepreparedness of our Armed Forces to effectively conduct sustained operations despite the presence,threat or use of WMD. Such preparedness requiresthe capability to deter, detect, protect against andrespond to the use of WMD when necessary. TheAdministration has significantly increased funding toenhance biological and chemical defense capabilitiesand has begun the vaccination of military personnel against the anthrax bacteria, the most feared biological weapon threat today. These efforts reinforce our deterrent posture and complement ournonproliferation efforts by reducing the political andmilitary value of WMD and their means of delivery.We are enhancing our ability to defend against hostile information operations, which could in the future takethe form of a full-scale, strategic information attack against our critical national infrastructures,government and economy-as well as attacks directed against our military forces. As othercountries develop their capability to conduct offensive information operations, we must ensure that ournational and defense information infrastructures arewell protected and that we can quickly recognize,defend against and respond decisively to aninformation attack.

Third, our military must also be able to transition tofighting major theater wars from a posture of global engagement-from substantial levels of peacetime engagement overseas as well as multiple concurrent smaller-scale contingencies. Withdrawing from suchoperations would pose significant political andoperational challenges. Ultimately, however, theUnited States must accept a degree of riskassociated with withdrawing from contingency operations and engagement activities in order toreduce the greater risk incurred if we failed torespond adequately to major theater wars.

Our priority is to shape effectively the international environment so as to deter the onset of major theaterwars. Should deterrence fail, however, the United States will defend itself, its allies and partners with allmeans necessary.

Preparing Now for anUncertain Future

We must prepare for an uncertain future even as weaddress today's security problems. This requires thatwe keep our forces ready for shaping and responding requirements in the near term, while at the same timeevolving our unparalleled capabilities to ensure wecan effectively shape and respond in the future.The 1997 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) strucka fine balance between near-term readiness, longterm modernization and quality of life improvementsfor our men and women in uniform. A key element ofthis balance was our decision to increase funding formodernization to protect long-term readiness. In thiscontext we decided to make modest reductions inpersonnel, primarily in support positions, across theforce structure. But in all these decisions we ensuredthat the high readiness levels of our forward-deployedand "first-to-fight" forces were maintained. While preparing for the challenges of the next century, thereadiness of today's force remains one of our highest priorities. That is why the Administration, inpartnership with the Congress, will continue to assurewe maintain the best-trained, best-equipped andbest-led military force in the world for the 21Century.

Government-wide, we will continue to fosterinnovative approaches, capabilities, technologies andorganizational structures to better protect Americanlives, property and interests at home and abroad. Inour defense efforts, we will continue to explore newapproaches for integrating the Active and Reserve components into a Total Force optimum for future missions, modernize our forces, ensure the quality ofmilitary personnel, and take prudent steps to position ourselves to effectively counter unlikely but significant future threats. We will also continue our rapidly growing efforts to integrate and improve the capabilityof Federal, state and local agencies-and our private sector partners-to protect against and respond totransnational threats at home.

The military challenges of the 21st century, coupledwith the aging of key elements of the U.S. force structure, require a fundamental transformation of ourmilitary forces. Although future threats are fluid andunpredictable, U.S. forces are likely to confront avariety of challenges across the spectrum of conflict,including efforts to deny our forces access to critical regions, urban warfare, information warfare, andattacks from chemical and biological weapons. Tomeet these challenges, we must transform our forcesby exploiting the Revolution in Military Affairs.Improved intelligence collection and assessment coupled with modern information processing,navigation and command and control capabilities areat the heart of the transformation of our warfightingcapabilities. Through a carefully planned and focused modernization program, we can maintain ourtechnological superiority and replace Cold War-eraequipment with new systems capable of taking fulladvantage of emerging technologies. With these advanced systems, the U.S. military will be able torespond rapidly to any contingency, dominate thebattlespace and conduct day-to-day operations muchmore efficiently and effectively.To support this transformation of our military forces,we will work cooperatively with the Congress to enact legislation to implement the Defense Reform Initiative, which will free up resources through aRevolution in Business Affairs. This revolution includes privatization, acquisition reform andelimination of excess infrastructure through twoadditional base realignment and closure (BRAC)rounds in 2001 and 2005. The Revolution in Military Affairs and the Revolution in Business Affairs areinterlocking revolutions: With both, and only with both,we will ensure that U.S. forces continue to haveunchallenged superiority in the 21 century.It is critical that we renew our commitment toAmerica's diplomacy-to ensure we have thediplomatic representation required to support ourglobal interests. This is central to our ability to remainan influential voice on international issues that affectour well-being. We will preserve that influence solong as we retain the diplomatic capabilities, military wherewithal and economic base to underwrite ourcommitments credibly.

We must continue aggressive efforts to construct appropriate twenty-first century national security programs and structures. The Defense Department,State Department and other international affairs agencies are similarly reorganizing to confront thepressing challenges of tomorrow as well as those weface today. Federal, state and local law enforcementand emergency response agencies are enhancingtheir ability to deal with terrorist threats. Governmentand industry are exploring ways to protect critical national infrastructures. We will continue looking across our government to see if during this time oftransition we are adequately preparing to meet thenational security challenges of the next century.

with a variety of highly specialized skills that either arenot readily available in the private sector, or are inhigh demand in the private sector. Persons withadvanced training in information technology are aprominent example. Recruiting and retaining quality people with requisite skills is a significant challenge,and we are exploring innovative approaches forensuring that government personnel needs are met.

Without preparing today to face the pressing challenges of tomorrow, our ability to exert global leadership and to create international conditions conducive to achieving our national goals would be indoubt. Thus, we must strive to strike the right balance between the near-term readiness requirements of shaping and responding and thelonger-term transformation requirements associatedwith preparing now for national security challenges inthe twenty-first century.

Intelligence, Surveillance andReconnaissance

Overarching Capabilities

Certain capabilities and technologies are critical toprotecting the United States itself and to theworldwide application of U.S. national power forshaping the international environment and respondingto the full spectrum of threats and crises.

Quality People

Quality people-military and civilian-are our mostcritical asset. The quality of our men and women inuniform will be the deciding factor in all future military operations. In order to fully realize the benefits of thetransformation of our military forces, we must ensurethat we remain the most fully prepared and besttrained fighting force in the world. Our people willcontinue to remain the linchpin to successfully exploiting our military capabilities across thespectrum of conflict. To ensure the quality of ourmilitary personnel, we will continue to place thehighest priority on initiatives and programs thatsupport recruiting, quality of life, and the training andeducation of our men and women in uniform.We must also have quality civilian personnel in thegovernment agencies that support our national security, from our diplomatic corps, to the intelligence community and law enforcement. Effectively countering transnational threats requires personnel

Our intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance(ISR) capabilities are critical instruments forimplementing our national security strategy. The U.S.intelligence community provides critical support to thefull range of our activities abroad-diplomatic,military, law enforcement, and environmental.Comprehensive collection and analytic capabilitiesare needed to provide warning of threats to U.S.national security, give analytical support to the policyand military communities, provide near-real timeintelligence in times of crisis while retaining global perspective, identify opportunities for advancing ournational interests, and maintain our information advantage in the international arena.ISR operations must cover a wider range of threatsand policy needs than ever before. We place thehighest priority on preserving and enhancing intelligence capabilities that provide information onstates and groups that pose the most serious threatsto U.S. security. Current intelligence priorities include states whose policies and actions are hostile to theUnited States; countries or other entities that possess strategic nuclear forces or control nuclear weapons,other WMD or nuclear fissile materials; transnational threats, including terrorism, international crime anddrug trafficking; potential regional conflicts that might affect U.S. national security interests; intensified counterintelligence against foreign intelligence collection inimical to U.S. interests, including economic and industrial espionage; information warfare threats; and threats to U.S. forces andcitizens abroad. Intelligence support is also requiredto develop and implement U.S. policies to promote democracy abroad, identify threats to our informationand space systems, monitor arms control agreements, support humanitarian efforts and protectthe environment.

Our ISR capabilities include world-wide collection ofnews and media broadcasts, reporting frominformants close to important events abroad, spacebased and airborne collection of imagery and signals intelligence, and integrated, in-depth analysis of allthese sources by highly skilled analysts. Exploitingour tremendous advantage in continuous, nonintrusive, space-based imaging and information processing, the ISR system provides the ability tomonitor treaty compliance, military movements andthe development, testing and deployment of weaponsof mass destruction. Using ISR products to support diplomatic and military action contributes to global security by demonstrating that the United States is aninvaluable ally, or would be a formidable foe.

vigorous counterintelligence efforts, comprehensive security programs and constant evaluation of theintentions and targets of foreign intelligence services.Counterintelligence remains integral to and underliesthe entire intelligence mission, whether the threatcomes from traditional espionage or the theft of ourvital economic information. Countering foreign effortsto gather technological, industrial and commercial information requires close cooperation between government and the private sector. Awareness of thethreat and adherence to prescribed personnel,information and physical security standards andprocedures, based on risk management principles,are critical.

U.S. intelligence capabilities were reviewed twice byindependent panels in 1998. In the wake of the May1998 Indian nuclear tests, retired Admiral David E.Jeremiah led a panel that examined the Intelligence Community's ability to detect and monitor foreign nuclear weapons programs. In July 1998, theCommission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat tothe United States issued a report on the challengeswe face in attempting to monitor the progress offoreign ballistic missile programs. Both reviews identified specific areas of intelligence collection andanalysis that need improvement. The Intelligence Community is taking aggressive action to improve itscapabilities in those areas and we will work closelywith the Congress to address the recommendationsin the two reports.

Space

While our ISR capabilities are increasingly enhancedby and dependent upon advanced technologies, there remains no substitute for informed, subjective human judgment. We must continue to attract and retain enough highly qualified people to provide human intelligence collection, translation and analysis inthose many emerging areas where there simply is notechnological substitute, and we must forge stronglinks to the private enterprises and public institutionswhose expertise is especially critical. Increased cooperation among the agencies in the Intelligence Community and the fusion of all intelligence disciplines provide the most effective collection andanalysis of data on high priority intelligence issues.

We are committed to maintaining our leadership inspace. Unimpeded access to and use of space isessential for protecting U.S. national security,promoting our prosperity and ensuring our well-beingin countless ways.

Space has emerged in this decade as a new global information utility with extensive political, diplomatic,military and economic implications for the United States. We are experiencing an ever-increasing migration of capabilities to space as the world seeks toexploit the explosion in information technology.Telecommunications, telemedicine, international financial transactions and global entertainment, news,education, weather and navigation all contribute directlyto the strength of our economy-and all are dependentupon space capabilities. Over 500 US companies aredirectly involved in the space industry, with 1996revenues of $77 billion projected to reach $122 billionby 2000.

Our policy is to promote development of the full rangeof space-based capabilities in a manner that protectsour vital security interests. We will deter

We must also be mindful of the continuing need foreffective security and counterintelligence programs.To protect sensitive national security information, wemust be able to effectively counter the collection efforts of foreign intelligence services through threats to our interests in space and, if deterrencefails, defeat hostile efforts against U.S. access to anduse of space. We will also maintain the ability tocounter space systems and services that could beused for hostile purposes against our ground, air andnaval forces, our command and control system, orother capabilities critical to our national security. Weare carefully regulating U.S. commercial space-based remote sensing to ensure that space imagery is notused to the detriment of U.S. security interests. Atthe same time, we will continue efforts to prevent thespread of weapons of mass destruction to space, andcontinue to form global partnerships with other spacefaring nations across the spectrum of economic,political, environmental and security issues. These efforts require a balanced approach across all typesof U.S. space assets-national security, military, andcommercial. We will remain vigilant to ensure that wedo not compromise our technological superiority while promoting partnerships in space.

Missile Defense

We have robust missile defense development anddeployment programs focused on systems to protect deployed U.S. forces and our friends and allies against theater ballistic missiles armed withconventional weapons or WMD. These systems willcomplement and strengthen our deterrence andnonproliferation efforts by reducing incentives todevelop or use WMD. Significantly, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin agreed at the Helsinki Summit tomaintain the ABM Treaty as a cornerstone ofstrategic stability, yet adapt it to meet the threatposed by shorter-range missiles-a threat we seek tocounter with U.S. theater missile defense (TMD)systems. The ABM-TMD demarcation agreement signed in New York on September 26, 1997 helps clarify the distinction between ABM systems, whichthe ABM Treaty limits, and TMD systems, which theABM Treaty does not limit. The demarcation agreement does not limit any current U.S. core TMDprograms, all of which have been certified by theUnited States as compliant with the ABM Treaty.

Although it remains the view of the intelligence community that it is unlikely that countries other thanRussia, China and perhaps North Korea will deployan ICBM capable of reaching any part of the U.S.before 2010, we are developing, consistent with ourobligations under the ABM Treaty, a limited national missile defense capability that would position the U.S.to make a decision as early as the year 2000 todeploy within three years a credible national missile defense system.

National Security Emergency Preparedness

We will do all we can to deter and prevent destructiveand threatening forces such as terrorism, WMD use,disruption of our critical infrastructures, natural disasters and regional or state-centered threats fromendangering our citizens. But if an emergency occurs, we must also be prepared to respond effectively at home and abroad to protect lives andproperty, mobilize the personnel, resources andcapabilities necessary to effectively handle theemergency, and ensure the survival of our institutionsand national infrastructures. National security emergency preparedness is imperative, andcomprehensive, all-hazard emergency planning byFederal departments, agencies and the military continues to be a crucial national security requirement.

Overseas Presence and PowerProjection

Due to our alliance commitments and other vital interests overseas, we must have a force structureand deployment posture that enable us to successfully conduct military operations across the spectrumof conflict, often in theaters distant from the United States. Maintaining a substantial overseas presence promotes regional stability by giving form andsubstance to our bilateral and multilateral security commitments and helps prevent the development ofpower vacuums and instability. It contributes todeterrence by demonstrating our determination todefend U.S., allied, and friendly interests in critical regions and better positions the United States torespond rapidly to crises. Equally essential iseffective and efficient global power projection, whichis the key to the flexibility demanded or our forces andultimately provides our national leaders with moreoptions in responding to potential crises and conflicts.Being able to project power allows us to shape, deter,and respond even when we have no permanent presence or a limited infrastructure in the region.

Extensive transportation, logistics and command,control, communications and intelligence (C3I)capabilities are unique U.S. strengths that enhanceour conventional deterrent and helps to shape theinternational environment. Strategic mobility allowsthe United States to be first on the scene withassistance in many national or international crisesand is a key to successful American leadership andengagement. The deployment of US andmultinational forces requires maintaining andensuring access to sufficient fleets of aircraft, ships,vehicles and trains, as well as bases, ports,prepositioned equipment and other infrastructure.The United States must have a robust Defense Transportation System, including both military assetsand U.S. flag commercial sealift and airlift, to remain actively engaged in world affairs.

Our need for strategic mobility to deploy our forces overseas is one of the primary reasons we arecommitted to gaining Senate advice and consent toratification of the Law of the Sea Convention. Needfor this treaty arose from the breakdown of customary international law as more and more nations unilaterally declared ever larger territorial seas andother claims over the oceans that threatened theglobal access and freedom of navigation that theUnited States must have to protect its vital national interests. In addition to lending the certainty of therule of law to an area critical to our national security,the treaty protects our economic interests andpreserves our leadership in global ocean policy. TheLaw of the Sea Convention thus buttresses thestrategic advantages that the United States gainsfrom being a global power.

Promoting Prosperity

The second core objective of our national security strategy is to promote America's prosperity through efforts at home and abroad. Our economic andsecurity interests are inextricably linked. Prosperity athome depends on stability in key regions with which wetrade or from which we import critical commodities,such as oil and natural gas. Prosperity also demandsour leadership in international development, financialand trade institutions. In turn, the strength of ourdiplomacy, our ability to maintain an unrivaled militaryand the attractiveness of our values abroad depend inlarge part on the strength of our economy.

Strengthening MacroeconomicCoordination

As national economies become more integrated internationally, the United States cannot thrive inisolation from developments abroad. Our economic health is vulnerable to disturbances that originate outside our borders. As such, cooperation with otherstates and international organizations is vital toprotecting the health of the global economic systemand responding to financial crises.

The recent financial troubles in Asia havedemonstrated that global financial markets dominatedby private capital flows provide both immense opportunities and great challenges. Developing waysto strengthen the international financial architecture isan urgent and compelling challenge. At theNovember 1997 Asia Pacific Economic CooperationForum (APEC) meeting, President Clinton and theother APEC leaders agreed to hold a series ofmeetings of finance ministers and central bankgovernors to address the Asian financial crisis andinternational financial reform. The meetings began inFebruary 1998 with representatives from 22 countriesand observers from the major international financial institutions. The on-going efforts of this group,commonly referred to as the Willard Group or G-22,has helped to identify measures to prevent and bettermanage financial crises and reform the international financial system.

The ultimate objective of our reform efforts is astable, resilient global financial system that promotes strong global economic growth providing benefits broadly to workers and investors in all countries.International financial institutions, particularly theInternational Monetary Fund (IMF), have a critical roleto play in this effort by promoting greater opennessand transparency, by building strong national financial systems, and by creating mechanisms so that theprivate sector shares more fully in the responsibilityfor preventing and resolving crises.Openness and Transparency: For capital to flowfreely and safely to where it can be used mostefficiently to promote growth, high quality informationabout each economy and investment opportunitymust also be freely available. The IMF introduced theSpecial Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) in 1996to improve the information collection and publication practices of countries accessing international capital markets. At present, 45 countries subscribe to theSDDS, but we need to encourage those IMFmembers who do not subscribe but seek access tointernational capital markets-particularly emerging market economies-to participate in the SDDS.International financial institutions also have aresponsibility to make their activities open andtransparent as a means of enhancing their credibilityand accountability. The IMF recently has shown leadership in promoting openness and transparency;however, more needs be done in this area.

Financial Sector Reform: The IMF's recent review ofthe Asian crisis experience highlighted the key roleplayed by the domestic financial sector as the flashpoint and transmission mechanism for the crisis andcontagion. Rapid growth and expanding access tointernational capital had run ahead of thedevelopment in countries in trouble of a genuine credit culture to assess risk and channel investment efficiently and of an effective financial sector regulatory and supervisory mechanism. The situationwas further exacerbated by inconsistent macroeconomic policies, generous explicit andimplicit government guarantees, significant injectionsof public funds to provide liquidity support to weakinstitutions, and to some extent capital controls thatdistorted the composition of capital flows.Crisis Resolution: Our efforts to reduce the risks ofcrises caused by poor policy or investor decisionsneed to be complemented by measures to equip investors, governments and the international financial system with the means to deal with those crises thatdo occur. The IMF plays the central role in thesystem by providing conditional international assistance to give countries the breathing room tostabilize their economies and restore market confidence. Two U.S.-inspired initiatives haveenhanced the IMF's role: the Emergency FinancingMechanism, which provides for rapid agreement toextraordinary financing requests in return for moreintense regular scrutiny, and the Supplemental Reserve Facility, which enables the IMF to lend atpremium rates in short-term liquidity crises andimprove borrower incentives. To fulfill its crisis resolution responsibility, the IMF must have adequate resources. We are concerned that IMF liquidity hasfallen to dangerously low levels that could impair theFund's capacity to respond to renewed pressures andmeet normal demands. The Administration is makingan intensive effort to obtain the necessary Congressional approval to meet our obligations to theIMF.

Recent crises have brought home that in a global financial market we need to find more effective mechanisms for sharing with the private sector theburden of managing such problems. In a world inwhich trillions of dollars flow through international markets every day, there is simply not going to beenough official financing to meet the crises that couldtake place. Moreover, official financing should notabsolve private investors from the consequences ofexcessive risk-taking and thus create the "moral hazard" that could plant the seeds of future crises.Broadening the Financial Reform Agenda: Inrecent years, the IMF has broadened its perspectiveto take account of a wider range of issues necessaryfor economic growth and financial stability. It isseeking to create a more level playing field in which private sector competition can thrive; reduceunproductive government spending, including excessive military expenditures and subsidies andguarantees to favored sectors and firms; protect themost vulnerable segments of society from bearing thebrunt of the burden of adjustment; and encouragemore effective participation by labor and the rest ofcivil society in the formulation and implementation ofeconomic policies, including protection of labor rights.The United States and the other leading industrialized nations are also promoting a range of World Bank andregional development bank reforms that the United States has been urging for a number of years. Keyelements include substantially increasing the share ofresources devoted to basic social programs thatreduce poverty; safeguarding the environment;supporting development of the private sector and openmarkets; promotion of good governance, including measures to fight corruption and improve theadministration of justice; and internal reforms of themultilateral development banks (MDBs) to make themmore efficient. Furthermore, international financial institutions such as the IMF and MDBs have played astrong role in recent years in countries and regions ofkey interest to the United States, such as Russia, theMiddle East, Haiti and Bosnia.

Enhancing AmericanCompetitiveness

We seek to ensure a business environment in whichthe innovative and competitive efforts of the private sector can flourish. To this end, we will continue toencourage the development, commercialization anduse of civilian technology. We will invest in a worldclass infrastructure for the twenty-first century,including the national information and space infrastructure essential for our knowledge-based economy. We will invest in education and training todevelop a workforce capable of participating in ourrapidly changing economy. And we will continue ourefforts to open foreign markets to U.S. goods andservices.

Technology Agreement and the World Trade Organization (WTO) Financial Services andTelecommunications Services Agreements. As welook ahead to the next WTO Ministerial meeting, tobe held in the United States in late 1999, we willaggressively pursue an agenda that addresses U.S.trade objectives. We will also remain vigilant inenforcing the trade agreements reached with ourtrading partners. That is why the U.S. Trade Representative and the Department of Commerce created offices in 1996 dedicated to ensuring foreign governments are fully implementing their commitments under these agreements.

Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets

Promoting an Open Trading System

In a world where over 95 percent of the world'sconsumers live outside the United States, we mustexpand our international trade to sustain economic growth at home. Our prosperity as a nation in thetwenty-first century will depend upon our ability tocompete effectively in international markets. Therapidly expanding global economy presents enormous opportunities for American companies andworkers. Over the next decade the global economy isexpected to grow at three times the rate of the U.S.economy. Growth will be particularly powerful inmany emerging markets. If we do not seize these opportunities, our competitors surely will. We mustcontinue working hard to secure and enforce agreements that protect intellectual property rightsand enable Americans to compete fairly in foreign markets.

Trade agreement implementing authority is essentialfor advancing our nation's economic interests. Congress has consistently recognized that the Presidentmust have the authority to break down foreign trade barriers and create good jobs. Accordingly, theAdministration will work with Congress to fashion anappropriate grant of fast track authority.

The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round ofnegotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffsand Trade significantly strengthened the world trading system. The U.S. economy is expected to gain over$100 billion per year in GDP once the Uruguay Roundis fully implemented. The Administration remains committed to carrying forward the success of theUruguay Round and to the success of the WTO as aforum for openly resolving disputes.We have completed the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) which goes far toward eliminating tariffs on high technology products and amounts to a

The Administration will continue to press our trading partners-multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally-toexpand export opportunities for U.S. workers, farmersand companies. We will position ourselves at thecenter of a constellation of trade relationships-suchas the World Trade Organization, APEC, theTransatlantic Marketplace and the Free Trade Area ofthe Americas (FTAA). We will seek to negotiate agreements, especially in sectors where the U.S. ismost competitive-as we did in the Information global annual tax cut of $5 billion. We look tocomplete the first agreement expanding products covered by the ITA in 1998. We also concluded alandmark WTO agreement that will dramatically liberalize world trade in telecommunications services.Under this agreement, covering over 99 percent ofWTO member telecommunications revenues, adecades old tradition of telecommunications monopolies and closed markets will give way tomarket opening deregulation and competition-principles championed by the United States.

The WTO agenda includes further negotiations toreform agricultural trade, liberalize service sector markets, and strengthen protection for intellectual property rights. At the May 1998 WTO Ministerial,members agreed to initiate preparations for these negotiations and to consider other possible negotiating topics, including issues not currently covered by WTO rules. These preparatory talks willcontinue over the course of the next year so that thenext round of negotiations can be launched at the1999 WTO ministerial meeting in the United States.We also have a full agenda of accession negotiationswith countries seeking to join the WTO. As always,the United States is setting high standards foraccession in terms of adherence to the rules andmarket access. Accessions offer an opportunity tohelp ground new economies in the rules-based trading system and reinforce their own reform programs. This is why we will take an active role inthe accession process dealing with the 32 applicants currently seeking WTO membership.

important strides on labor issues. The WTO hasendorsed the importance of core labor standards sought by the United States since the EisenhowerAdministration-the right to organize and bargain collectively, and prohibitions against child labor andforced labor. We will continue pressing for betterintegration of the international core labor standards intothe WTO's work, including through closer WTOinteraction with the International Labor Organization(ILO).

We continue to ensure that liberalization of trade doesnot come at the expense of national security orenvironmental protection. For example, the national security, law enforcement and trade policy communities worked together to make sure that theWTO agreement liberalizing global investment intelecommunications was consistent with U.S. national security interests. Moreover, our leadership in theUruguay Round negotiations led to the incorporation ofenvironmental provisions into the WTO agreementsand creation of the Committee on Trade andEnvironment, where governments continue to pursuethe goal of ensuring that trade and environment policies are mutually supportive. In addition, with U.S.leadership, countries participating in the Summit of theAmericas are engaged in sustainable development initiatives to ensure that economic growth does notcome at the cost of environmental protection.In May 1998, President Clinton presented to the WTOa set of proposals to further U.S. international trade objectives:

Through Organization for Economic Cooperation andDevelopment (OECD) negotiations of a Multilateral Agreement on Investment, we are seeking to establishclear legal standards on expropriation, access tobinding international arbitration for disputes andunrestricted investment-related transfers across borders. Also in the OECD, the United States is takingon issues such as corruption and labor practices thatcan distort trade and inhibit U.S. competitiveness. Weseeking to have OECD members outlaw bribery offoreign officials, eliminate the tax deductibility of foreign bribes, and promote greater transparency ingovernment procurement. To date, our efforts onprocurement have been concentrated in the WorldBank and the regional development banks, but ourinitiative to pursue an agreement on transparency inWTO member procurement regimes should make anadditional important contribution. We have also made

First, that the WTO make further efforts toeliminate trade barriers and pursue a more openglobal trading system in order to spur economic growth, better jobs, higher incomes, and the freeflow of ideas, information and people.

Second, that the WTO provide a forum where business, labor, environmental and consumergroups can provide regular input to help guide further evolution of the WTO. The trading systemwe build for the 21st century must ensure thateconomic competition does not threaten thelivelihood, health and safety of ordinary familiesby eroding environmental and consumerprotection or labor standards.

Third, that a high-level meeting of trade andenvironmental officials be convened to provide direction for WTO environmental efforts, and thatthe WTO and the International Labor Organization commit to work together to ensurethat open trade raises the standard of living forworkers and respects core labor standards.

Fourth, that the WTO open its doors to thescrutiny and participation of the public by takingevery feasible step to bring openness andaccountability to its operations, such as byopening its dispute settlement hearings to thepublic and making the briefs for those hearings publicly available.

Fifth, that the nations of the world join the United States in not imposing any tariffs on electronic commercial transmissions sent across national borders. The revolution in information technology represented by the Internet is the greatest forcefor prosperity in our lifetimes; we cannot allow discriminatory barriers to stunt the developmentof this promising new economic opportunity. Anelectronic commerce work program was agreedto at the May 1998 WTO Ministerial. It will bereviewed at the 1999 ministerial meeting.

Sixth, that all WTO members make government purchases through open and fair bidding andadopt the OECD antibribery convention.Prosperity depends upon government practicesthat are based upon the rule of law rather thanbureaucratic caprice, cronyism or corruption.

Seventh, that the WTO explore a faster trade negotiating process and develop an open trading system that can change as fast as the global marketplace. Positive steps include annual tariffand subsidy reductions in agriculture, greateropenness and competition in the services sector,further tariff reductions in the industrial sector,and stronger intellectual property protection.

Export Strategy and AdvocacyProgram

The Administration created America's first national export strategy, reforming the way government workswith the private sector to expand exports. The newTrade Promotion Coordination Committee (TPCC) hasbeen instrumental in improving export promotion efforts, coordinating our export financing, implementinga government-wide advocacy initiative and updating market information systems and product standards education.

The export strategy is working, with the United States regaining its position as the world's largest exporter.While our strong export performance has supported millions of new, export-related jobs, we must exportmore in the years ahead if we are to further strengthenour trade balance position and raise living standardswith high-wage jobs. Our objective remains to expandU.S. exports to over $1.2 trillion by the year 2000,which will mean over 2.5 million new American jobsand a total of over 14.6 million jobs supported byexports.

Enhanced Export Control

The United States is a world leader in high technology exports, including satellites, cellular phones,computers and commercial aircraft. Some of thistechnology has direct or indirect military applications.For that reason, the United States government carefully controls high technology exports through alicensing process involving the Department ofDefense, the Department of State, the Commerce Department and other agencies. Changes to U.S.export controls over the last decade have allowed America's most important growth industries tocompete effectively overseas and create good jobs athome while ensuring that proper safeguards are inplace to protect important national security interests.The cornerstone of our export control policy isprotection of our national security; but imposing thetightest possible restrictions on high technology exports is not always the best way to protect oursecurity. In an increasingly competitive global economy, the United States retains a monopoly oververy few technologies. As a result, rigid export controls increasingly would not protect our national security because the same products can be obtained readily from foreign sources. Rigid controls wouldmake U.S. high technology companies less competitive globally, thus losing market share and becomingless able to produce the innovative, cutting-edgeproducts for the U.S. military and our allies.

Our current policy-developed in the Reagan andBush Administrations and continued by President Clinton-recognizes that we must balance a variety offactors. In the wake of the Cold War, the BushAdministration accelerated the process of moving thelicensing of essentially commercial items from theState Department's Munitions List to the Commerce administered Commodity Control List in order topromote high technology exports by making license decisions more predictable and timely. In 1995, byExecutive Order, President Clinton expanded the rightof the Departments of Defense, State and Energy andthe Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to fully participate in the decision-making process.

Previously, these agencies reviewed only certaindual-use applications; as a result of the ExecutiveOrder, they have the right to review every dual-useapplication. If any of these agencies disagree with aproposed export, it can block the license and put theissue into a dispute resolution process that canultimately rise to the President. As a result, reviewsof dual-use licenses are today more thorough andbroadly based than ever before.

While our export controls and the regulations thatimplement them have become easier for American exporters to follow, we have also enhanced our abilityto identify, stop and prosecute those who attempt toevade them. For example, in fiscal year 1997 effortsof the Commerce Department's criminal investigatorsled to over $1 million in criminal fines and over $16million in civil penalties. We have significant enforcement weapons to use against those whowould evade our export controls, and we are usingthem vigorously.

Finally, U.S. efforts to stem proliferation cannot beeffective without the cooperation of other countries.To that end, we have strengthened multilateral cooperation through the Nuclear Suppliers Group, theMissile Technology Control Regime, the AustraliaGroup (for the control of chemical and biological weapons-related related items), the Chemical Weapons Convention, and the WassenaarArrangement, which through U.S. leadership isshaping multilateral export controls for the nextcentury. These multilateral efforts enlist the world community in the battle against the proliferation ofweapons of mass destruction, advanced conventional weapons and sensitive technologies, while at thesame time producing a level playing field for U.S.business by ensuring that our competitors facecorresponding export controls.

Providing for Energy Security

The United States depends on oil for about 40 percentof its primary energy needs and roughly half of our oilneeds are met with imports. Although we import lessthan 10% of Persian Gulf exports, our allies in Europeand Japan account for about 85% of these exports,thus underscoring the continued strategic importanceof the region. We are undergoing a fundamental shiftaway from reliance on Middle East oil. Venezuela isour number one foreign supplier and Africa supplies15% of our imported oil. Canada, Mexico andVenezuela combined supply more than twice as muchoil to the United States as the Arab OPEC countries.The Caspian Basin, with potential oil reserves of 160billion barrels, promises to play an increasingly important role in meeting rising world energy demandin coming decades. We have made it a priority to workwith the countries of the region to develop multiple pipeline ventures that will ensure access to the oil. Weare also working on several fronts to enhance thestability and safeguard the independence of these nations. While these developments are significant, wemust remember that the vast majority of proven oilreserves lie in the Middle East and that the global oilmarket is largely interdependent.

Conservation measures and research leading togreat-er energy efficiency and alternative fuels are acritical element of the U.S. strategy for energy security. The U.S. economy has grown roughly 75percent since the first oil shock in 1973. During thattime U.S. oil consumption remained virtually stable,reflecting conservation efforts and increased energy efficiency. Our research must continue to focus ondeveloping highly efficient transportation systems andto shift them to alternative fuels, such as hydrogen,ethanol or methanol from biomass, and others. Thisresearch will also help address concerns about climate change by providing new approaches formeeting guidelines on emission of greenhouse gases.Over the longer term, U.S. dependence on access toforeign oil sources may be increasingly important asdomestic resources are depleted. Although U.S. oilconsumption has been essentially level since 1973, ourreliance on imported oil has increased due to a declinein domestic production. Domestic oil production declined during that period because oil prices were nothigh enough to generate new oil exploration sufficientto sustain production levels from our depleted resourcebase. Conservation and energy researchnotwithstand-ing, the United States will continue tohave a vital interest in ensuring access to foreign oilsources. We must continue to be mindful of the needfor regional stability and security in key producing areasto ensure our access to and the free flow of these resources.

Promoting Sustainable

Development Abroad

Environmental and natural resource issues canimpede sustainable development efforts and promote regional instability. Many nations are struggling toprovide jobs, education and other services to their citizens. The continuing poverty of a quarter of theworld's people leads to hunger, malnutrition, economic migration and political unrest. Malaria, AIDS and otherepidemics, including some that can spread through environmental damage, threaten to overwhelm thehealth facilities of developing countries, disrupt societies and stop economic growth.

Sustainable development improves the prospects fordemocracy in developing countries and expands thedemand for U.S. exports. It alleviates pressure onthe global environment, reduces the attraction of theillegal drug trade and other illicit commerce, andimproves health and economic productivity. U.S.foreign assistance focuses on four key elements ofsustainable development: broad-based economic growth, environmental security, population andhealth, and democracy.

We will continue to advocate environmentally sound private investment and responsible approaches byinternational lenders. The multilateral developmentbanks are now placing increased emphasis uponsustainable development in their funding decisions,including assisting borrowing countries to bettermanage their economies. The U.S. Initiative on Joint Implementation, part of the Administration's Climate Change Action Plan, encourages U.S. businesses andnon-governmental organizations to apply innovative technologies and practices to reduce greenhouse gasemissions and promote sustainable development abroad. The initiative, which includes 32 projects in 12countries, has proven effective in transferring technology for environmentally sound, sustainable development. The Global Environmental Facilityprovides a source of financial assistance to thedeveloping world for climate change, biodiversity andoceans initiatives that will benefit all the world'scitizens. Environmental damage in countries of theNIS and Central and Eastern Europe continues toimpede their ability to emerge asprosperous, independent countries. We are focusing technical assistance and encouraging nongovernmental environmental groups to provide expertise to the NIS and Central and Eastern European nations that have suffered the most acute environmental crises.

Promoting Democracy

The third core objective of our national security strategy is to promote democracy and human rights.The number of states moving away from repressive governance toward democratic and publicly accountable institutions is impressive. Since thesuccess of many of those changes is by no means assured, our strategy must focus on strengthening their commitment and institutional capacity to implement democratic reforms.

Emerging Democracies

We seek international support in helping strengthen democratic and free market institutions and norms incountries making the transition from closed to opensocieties. This commitment to see freedom andrespect for human rights take hold is not only just, butpragmatic, for strengthened democratic institutions benefit the United States and the world.

The United States is helping consolidate democraticand market reforms in Central and Eastern Europeand the NIS. Integrating the Central and Eastern European nations into European security andeconomic organizations, such as NATO and the EU,will help lock in and preserve the impressive progressthese nations have made in instituting democratic andmarket-economic reforms. Our intensified interactionwith Ukraine has helped move that country onto thepath of economic reform, which is critical to its longterm stability. In addition, our efforts in Russia, Ukraineand the other NIS facilitate our goal of achieving continued reductions in nuclear arms and compliancewith international nonproliferation accords.

Continuing advances in democracy and free markets inour own hemisphere remain a priority, as reflected bythe President's 1997 trips to Latin America and theCaribbean and the Summit of the Americas in Santiagothis year. In the Asia Pacific region, economic dynamism is increasingly associated with political modernization, democratic evolution and the wideningof the rule of law-and it has global impacts. We areparticularly attentive to states whose entry into thecamp of market democracies may influence the future direction of an entire region; South Africa now holdsthat potential with regard to sub-Saharan Africa.

The methods for assisting emerging democracies areas varied as the nations involved. We must continue leading efforts to mobilize international economic andpolitical resources, as we have with Russia, Ukraineand the other NIS. We must take firm action to helpcounter attempts to reverse democracy, as we have inHaiti and Paraguay. We must give democratic nationsthe fullest benefits of integration into foreign markets,which is part of the reason NAFTA and the UruguayRound of GATT ranked so high on our agenda andwhy we are now working to forge the FTAA. We musthelp these nations strengthen the pillars of civil society,supporting administration of justice and rule of lawprograms, assisting the development of democraticcivil-military relations, and training foreign police andsecurity forces to solve crimes and maintain orderwithout violating the basic rights of their citizens. Andwe must seek to improve their market institutions andfight corruption and political discontent by encouraginggood governance practices.

Adherence to Universal Human

Rights and Democratic PrinciplesWe must sustain our efforts to press for political liberalization and respect for basic human rights worldwide, including in countries that continue to defydemocratic advances. Working bilaterally andthrough multilateral institutions, the United States promotes universal adherence to international human rights and democratic principles. Our efforts in theUnited Nations and other organizations are helping tomake these principles the governing standards foracceptable international behavior.

We will also continue to work-bilaterally and withmultilateral institutions-to ensure that internationalhuman rights principles protect the most vulnerable ortraditionally oppressed groups in the world-women,children, workers, refugees and persons persecutedon the basis of their religious beliefs or ethnic descent. To this end, we will seek to strength-en andimprove the UN Human Rights Commission and otherinternational mechanisms that promote human rightsand address violations of international humanitarianlaw, such as the international war crimes tribunals forthe former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

To focus additional attention on the more vulnerable ortraditionally oppressed people, we seek to spearheadnew international initiatives to combat the sexual exploitation of minors, child labor, homelessnessamong children, violence against women and children,and female genital mutilation. We will continue towork with individual nations, such as Russia andChina, and with international institutions to combat religious persecution. We are encouraging governments to not return people to countries wherethey face persecution. We ask that they provide asylum or offer temporary protection to persons fleeing situations of conflict or generalized human rights abuses. We seek to ensure that such personsare not returned without due consideration of theirneed for permanent protection.

Violence against women and trafficking in women andgirls is are international problem with national implications. We have seen cases of trafficking in theUnited States for purposes of forced prostitution,sweatshop labor and domestic servitude. The United States is committed to combating trafficking inwomen and girls with a focus on the areas ofprevention, victim assistance and protection, andenforcement. On March 11, 1998, President Clinton directed a wide range of expanded efforts to combat violence against women in the United States andaround the world, including efforts to increase national and international awareness of trafficking inwomen and girls. The President called for continued efforts to fully implement the 1994 Violence AgainstWomen Act and restore its protection for immigrant victims of domestic violence in the United States sothat they will not be forced to choose between deportation and abuse. He also called upon theSenate to give its advice and consent to ratification tothe Convention on the Elimination of all Forms ofDiscrimination Against Women, which will enhanceour efforts to combat violence against women, reform unfair inheritance and property rights, and strengthenwomen's access to fair employment and economic opportunity.

The United States will continue to speak out againsthuman rights abuses and carry on human rights dialogues with countries willing to engage usconstructively. Because police and internal security services can be a source of human rights violations,we use training and contacts between U.S. lawenforcement and their foreign counterparts to helpaddress these problems. Federal law enforcement agents can serve as role models for investigators incountries where the police have been instruments ofoppression and at the same time reduce internationalcrime and terrorism that affects U.S. interests. Inappropriate circumstances, we must be prepared totake strong measures against human rights violators.These include economic sanctions, as have beenmaintained against Nigeria, Iraq, Burma, North Koreaand Cuba, visa restrictions and restricting sales ofarms and police equipment that may be used tocommit human rights abuses.

Humanitarian Activities

Our efforts to promote democracy and human rightsare complemented by our humanitarian programs,which are designed to alleviate human suffering, helpestablish democratic regimes that respect human rights and pursue appropriate strategies for economic development. These efforts also enable the United States to help prevent humanitarian disasters with farmore significant resource implications.

We also must seek to promote reconciliation in states experiencing civil conflict and to address migration andrefugee crises. To this end, the United States willprovide appropriate financial support and work withother nations and international bodies, such as theInternational Committee of the Red Cross and the UNHigh Commissioner for Refugees. We also will assist efforts to protect the rights of refugees and displaced persons and to address the economic and social rootcauses of internal displacement and international flight. Finally, we will cooperate with other states tocurb illegal immigration into this country.

Private firms and associations are natural allies inactivities and efforts intended to bolster market economies. We have natural partners in labor unions,human rights groups, environmental advocates,chambers of commerce and election monitors inpromoting democracy and respect for human rightsand in providing international humanitarian assistance; thus, we should promote democratization efforts through private and non-governmental groupsas well as foreign governments.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy requires a pragmatic, long-term effort focused on bothvalues and institutions. Our goal is a broadening of thecommunity of free-market democracies and strongerinternational non-governmental movements committedto human rights and democratization.

II. Integrated Regional Approaches

Our policies toward different regions reflect our overall strategy tailored to unique challenges andopportunities.

Europe and Eurasia

European stability is vital to our own security. TheUnited States has two strategic goals in Europe. Thefirst is to build a Europe that is truly integrated,democratic, prosperous and at peace. This would complete the mission the United States launched 50years ago with the Marshall Plan and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

Our second goal is to work with our allies andpartners across the Atlantic to meet the global challenges no nation can meet alone. This means working together to support peace efforts in troubled regions, to counter global threats such as the spreadof weapons of mass destruction and dual-usetechnology, and to build a more open world economyand without barriers to transatlantic trade andinvestment. We will continue to strengthen theOSCE's role in conflict prevention and crisis management and seek closer cooperation with ourEuropean partners in dealing with non-military security threats through our New Transatlantic Agenda with the European Union (EU).

Enhancing Security

NATO remains the anchor of American engagementin Europe and the linchpin of transatlantic security.As a guarantor of European security and a force forEuropean stability, NATO must play a leading role inpromoting a more integrated and secure Europe,prepared to respond to new challenges. We willmaintain approximately 100,000 military personnel inEurope to fulfill our commitments to NATO, provide avisible deterrent against aggression and coercion,contribute to regional stability, respond to crises,sustain our vital transatlantic ties and preserve U.S.leadership in NATO.

NATO enlargement is a crucial element of the U.S.and Allied strategy to build an undivided, peaceful Europe. The end of the Cold War changed thenature of the threats to this region, but not the factthat Europe's stability is vital to our own national security. The addition of well-qualified democracies,which have demonstrated their commitment to thevalues of freedom and the security of the broaderregion, will help deter potential threats to Europe,deepen the continent's stability, bolster its democratic advances, erase its artificial divisions, and strengthenan Alliance that has proven its effectiveness bothduring and since the Cold War.

In December 1997, the NATO foreign ministers signed the three protocols of accession for Poland,Hungary, and the Czech Republic, making them fullmembers of the Alliance subject to ratification by allcurrent and incoming NATO members. On May 21,1998, the President signed the instruments ofratification for the three protocols following a strong,bipartisan 80-19 vote of approval in the U.S. Senate.Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic will makethe Alliance stronger while helping to enlarge Europe's zone of democratic stability. They havebeen leaders in Central Europe's dramatic transformation over the past decade and have helpedmake Central Europe the continent's most robustzone of economic growth. They will strengthenNATO through the addition of military resources,strategic depth and the prospect of greater stability inEurope's central region. Our Alliance with them willimprove our ability to protect and advance ourinterests in the transatlantic area and contribute toour security in the years to come.

At the same time, we have vigorously pursued effortsto help other countries that aspire to membership become the best possible candidates. Together withour Allies we are enhancing the Partnership forPeace and continuing political contacts with aspiring states. We are also continuing bilateral programs toadvance this agenda, such as the President'sWarsaw Initiative, which is playing a critical role inhelping the militaries of Central and Eastern Europeand Eurasia become more interoperable with NATO.Building on the increasing links between NATO andthe Partnership for Peace nations, Partners willincreasingly contribute to real-world NATO missions,as many are doing in the NATO-led operation inBosnia.

As we help build a comprehensive European security architecture, we must continue to focus on regional security challenges.

Some European nations do not desire NATOmembership, but do desire strengthened ties with theAlliance. The Partnership for Peace provides anideal venue for such relationships. It formalizes relations, provides a mechanism for mutual beneficial interaction and establishes a sound basis forcombined action should that be desired. For all these reasons, Partnership for Peace will remain a centraland permanent part of the European security architecture.

The United States has an abiding interest in peaceand stability in Bosnia because continued war in thatregion threatens all of Europe's stability. Implementation of the Dayton Accords is the best hope forcreating a self-sustaining peace in Bosnia. NATO-ledforces are contributing to a secure environment inBosnia and providing essential support for thebroader progress we are making in implementing theDayton Accords. Further progress is necessary,however, to create conditions that will allow implementation to continue without a large military presence. We are committed to full implementationof the Dayton Accords and success in Bosnia. Wesupport the efforts of the International Criminal Tribunalfor the former Yugoslavia and broader efforts topromote justice and reconciliation in Bosnia.

NATO also is pursuing several other initiatives toenhance its ability to respond to new challenges anddeepen ties between the Alliance and Partnercountries. NATO has launched the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council to strengthen political dialogueand practical cooperation with all Partners, andestablished a NATO-Ukraine Charter, which providesa framework for enhanced relations. As a result ofthe 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act, NATO andRussia developed the Permanent Joint Council toenhance political consultation and practical cooperation, while retaining NATO's decision-making authority. Our shared goal remains constructive Russian participation in the European security system.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization will hold itsFiftieth Anniversary summit meeting in Washingtonon April 24-25, 1999. This summit will mark NATO'sextraordinary record of success over the past fiftyyears in protecting the security of the United Statesand our European allies. As agreed at the 1997Madrid summit, we hope to use the upcoming summit meeting in Washington to welcome the entry ofPoland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic as newmembers of the alliance. Looking to the future, thesummit will advance the common work of NATOallies and partners to build an undivided Europe thatis peaceful, prosperous, and democratic.Southeastern Europe and the Balkans: There aresignificant security challenges in Southeastern Europe.Instability in this region could threaten theconsolidation of reforms, disrupt commerce andundermine our efforts to bring peace to Bosnia andother parts of the former Yugoslavia.

We are deeply concerned about the ongoing bloodshed in Kosovo, which threatens security andstability throughout the Balkan region. We are firmly convinced that the problems in Kosovo can best beresolved through a process of open andunconditional dialogue between authorities inBelgrade and the Kosovar Albanian leadership. Weseek a peaceful resolution of the crisis thatguarantees restoration of human and political rightswhich have been systematically denied the KosovarAlbanian population since Belgrade withdrew autonomy in 1989. In support of that objective,NATO is reviewing options for deterring furtherviolence against the civilian population in Kosovo andstabilizing the military situation in the region.We are redoubling our efforts to advance theintegration of several new democracies inSoutheastern Europe (Bulgaria, Romania, Sloveniaand the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia)into the European mainstream. More specifically, thePresident's Action Plan for Southeast Europe seeksto promote further democratic, economic, and military reforms in these countries, to encourage greaterregional cooperation, and to advance common interests, such as closer contact with NATO, andincreased law enforcement training and exchanges toassist in the fight against organized crime.Tensions on Cyprus, Greek-Turkish disagreements inthe Aegean and Turkey's relationship with the EU haveserious implications for regional stability and theevolution of European political and security structures.

Our goals are to stabilize the region by reducing longstanding Greek-Turkish tensions and pursuing acomprehensive settlement on Cyprus. A democratic,secular, stable and Western-oriented Turkey is criticalto these efforts and has supported broader U.S. effortsto enhance stability in Bosnia, the NIS and the MiddleEast, as well as to contain Iran and Iraq.The Baltic States: For over fifty years, the United States has recognized the sovereignty andindependence of the republics of Estonia, Latvia andLithuania. During this period, we neveracknowledged their forced incorporation into theSoviet Union. The special nature of our relationshipwith the Baltic States is recognized in the Charter ofPartnership signed on January 16, 1998, which clarifies the principles upon which U.S. relations withthe Baltic states are based and provides a frameworkfor strengthening ties and pursuing common goals.

These goals include integration of Latvia, Lithuaniaand Estonia into the transatlantic community anddevelopment of close, cooperative relationshipsamong all the states in Northeastern Europe. TheCharter also establishes mechanisms for high-level review and adjustment of this cooperation.Northern Ireland: After a 30-year winter of sectarian violence, Northern Ireland has the promise of aspringtime of peace. The agreement that emergedfrom the Northern Ireland peace talks on April 10,1998 opened the way to build a society based onenduring peace, justice and equality. On May 22,1998, the people of Ireland and Northern Ireland seized this opportunity to turn the common tragedy ofNorthern Ireland's past into a shared triumph for thefuture by strongly endorsing the peace accord. In sodoing, they have written a new chapter in the richhistory of their island by creating the best chance forpeace in a generation.

The United States actively promoted this peace process and will continue to stand with those whoseek to build lasting peace and enduring prosperity inIreland and Northern Ireland. They can count on thecontinuing aid, support and encouragement of theUnited States. The task of making the peace endurewill be difficult. Some may seek to undermine thisagreement by returning to violence. Anyone whodoes so, from whatever side and whatever faction,will have no friends in America. We will work closelywith British and Irish law enforcement andintelligence officials to prevent outrages before theyhappen by identifying terrorists and their sources offinancial and material support.

We will continue to work with Northern Ireland'sleaders as they seek to transform the promise of theAccord into a reality-with new democratic institutions and new economic opportunities for all ofNorthern Ireland's people. Working through theInternational Fund for Ireland and the private sector,we will help the people seize the opportunities thatpeace will bring to attract new investment to createnew factories, workplaces and jobs, and establishnew centers of learning to prepare for the 21stCentury.

Newly Independent States (NIS): The United Statesis pursuing a wide range of security objectives in theNIS. We seek to bring Russia, Ukraine and the otherNIS into a new, cooperative European security order,which includes strengthening their participation inNATO Partnership for Peace activities and building effective NATO-Russia and NATO-Ukraine partnerships. We seek to reduce the threat of nuclearwar and the spread of nuclear weapons and materials,as well as other weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, especially to outlaw states.The United States has vital security interests in theevolution of Russia, Ukraine and the other NIS intodemocratic market economies, peacefully andprosperously integrated into the world community. Thegovernmental and financial sectors in this region appear especially susceptible to penetration byorganized criminal groups, who have the ability tosubvert and destroy these nascent institutions.Further democratic and economic reforms andintegration into the WTO and other international economic institutions will strengthen the rule of law andrespect for human rights, foster growth by expanding private sector activity, and encourage open andcooperative policies toward the global community.

Promoting Prosperity

Europe is a key element in America's global commercial engagement. Europe and the United States produce over half of all global goods andservices. More than 60% of total U.S. investment abroad is in Europe and fourteen million workers onboth sides of the Atlantic earn their livelihoods directlyfrom transatlantic commerce. As part of the NewTransatlantic Agenda launched at the 1995 U.S.-EUSummit in Madrid, the United States and the EUagreed to take concrete steps to reduce barriers totrade and investment through the creation of an openNew Transatlantic Marketplace. We have concluded Mutual Recognition Agreements eliminating redundant testing and certification requirements covering $50billion in two-way trade. Our governments are alsocooperating closely with the Transatlantic Business Dialogue, a U.S.-European business partnership, toaddress a wide range of trade barriers.

Building on the New Transatlantic Agenda, the United States and the EU launched the Transatlantic Economic Partnership on May 18, 1998. This is amajor new initiative to deepen our economic relations, reinforce our political ties and reduce trade frictions that have plagued our bilateral relationship.The first element of the initiative is reducing barriersthat affect manufacturing, agriculture and services.In the manufacturing area we will focus on standardsand technical barriers that American businesses haveidentified as the most significant obstacle toexpanding trade. In the agricultural area we willfocus on regulatory barriers that have inhibited theexpansion of agriculture trade, particularly in thebiotechnology area. In the area of services we willseek to open our markets further and to create newopportunities for the number of service industries thatare so active in the European market.

The second element of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership is a broader, cooperative approach toaddressing a wide range of trade issues. We agreedto maintain current practices, and will continue notimposing duties on electronic transmissions anddevelop a work program in the WTO for electronic commerce. We will seek to adopt common positionsand effective strategies for accelerating compliancewith WTO commitments on intellectual property. Wewill seek to promote government procurement opportunities, including promoting compatibility ofelectronic procurement information and government contracting systems. We will seek innovative ways topromote our shared labor and environmental values around the world. To promote fair competition, wewill seek to enhance the compatibility of ourprocedures with potentially significant reductions incost for American companies.

The United States strongly supports the process ofEuropean integration embodied in the EU. We are alsoencouraging bilateral trade and investment in non-EUcountries and supporting enlargement of the EU. Werecognize that EU nations face significant economic challenges with nearly 20 million people unemployed,and that economic stagnation has eroded public support for funding outward-looking foreign policiesand greater integration. We are working closely withour European partners to expand employment,promote long-term growth and support the NewTransatlantic Agenda.

By supporting historic market reforms in Central andEastern Europe and in the NIS, we both strengthenour own economy and help new democracies takeroot. Poland, economically troubled as recently as1989, now symbolizes the new dynamism and rapid growth that extensive, free-market reforms makepossible. Recent economic turbulence in Russia demonstrates that the transition to a moreprosperous, market-based economy will be a longterm process characterized by promise anddisappointment. In Ukraine, reinvigorating economic reform remains a key challenge to strengthening national security and independence. Much remainsto be done throughout the region to assure sustainable economic recoveries and adequate social protection.

The United States will continue helping the NISeconomies integrate into international economic andother institutions and develop healthy business climates. We will continue to mobilize theinternational community to provide assistance tosupport reform. The United States is working closelywith Russia and Ukraine in priority areas, including defense conversion, the environment, trade andinvestment, and scientific and technological cooperation. We are also encouraging investment,especially by U.S. companies, in NIS energy resourcesand their export to world markets, thereby expandingand diversifying world energy supplies and promoting prosperity in the NIS.

Ultimately, the success of economic and financial reforms in the countries recently emerged fromcommunism will depend more on private investmentthan official aid. One of our priorities, therefore, is tohelp countries stimulate foreign and domestic investment. At the Helsinki Summit, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin defined an ambitious reform agenda covering key tax, energy and commerciallaws crucial for Russia to realize its potential forattracting foreign investment. Further, the Presidents outlined steps to accelerate Russian membership oncommercial terms in key economic organizationssuch as the WTO. It is in both Russia's interest andours that we work with Russian leaders on passageof key economic and commercial legislation. We arecooperating with Russia to facilitate oil and gasexports to and through Russia from neighboring Caspian countries. We also support development ofnew East-West oil and gas export routes across theCaspian Sea and through the Transcaucasus andTurkey.

Ukraine is at an important point in its economic transition-one that will affect its integration withEurope and domestic prosperity. The United Stateshas mobilized the international community's supportfor Ukrainian economic reform, pushed to improve Ukraine's investment climate, and championed itsintegration into key European, transatlantic andglobal economic institutions. Two other challengesstand out: first, to instill respect for the rule of law sothat a more transparent, level economic playing fieldis established and democratic governance prevails;and, second, to gain international support as it seeksto close down Chernobyl and reform its energy sector. The U.S.-Ukraine Binational Commission,chaired by Vice President Gore and President Kuchma, serves as a focal point to coordinate bilateral relations and to invigorate Ukrainian reform efforts.

A stable and prosperous Caucasus and Central Asiawill help promote stability and security from theMediterranean to China and facilitate rapid development and transport to international markets of thelarge Caspian oil and gas resources, with substantialU.S. commercial participation. While the new statesin the region have made progress in their quest forsovereignty and a secure place in the internationalarena, much remains to be done in democratic andeconomic reform and in settling regional conflicts,such as Nagorno-Karabakh and Abkhazia.

Promoting Democracy

Thoroughgoing democratic and economic reforms inthe NIS and Europe's former communist states are thebest measures to avert conditions which could fosteraggressive nationalism and ethnic hatreds. Already,the prospect of joining or rejoining the Western democratic family has dampened the forces ofnationalism and strengthened the forces of democracyand reform in many countries of the region.

The independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, anddemocratic and economic reform of the NIS areimportant to American interests. To advance thesegoals, we are utilizing our bilateral relationships, ourleadership of international institutions, and billions ofdollars in private and multilateral resources. But thecircumstances affecting the smaller countries dependin significant measure on the fate of reform in thelargest and most powerful-Russia. The United Stateswill continue vigorously to promote Russian reform andinternational integration, and discourage any reversal inthe progress that has been made. Our economic andpolitical support for the Russian government dependson its commitment to internal reform and a responsible foreign policy.

East Asia and the Pacific President Clinton's vision of a new Pacific communitylinks security interests with economic growth and ourcommitment to democracy and human rights. Wecontinue to build on that vision, cementing America'srole as a stabilizing force in a more integrated AsiaPacific region.

Enhancing Security

Our military presence has been essential tomaintaining the stability that has enabled most nationsin the Asia Pacific region to build thriving economies forthe benefit of all. To deter aggression and secure ourown interests, we will maintain approximately 100,000U.S. military personnel in the region. Our commitmentto maintaining an active military presence in the regionand our treaty alliances with Japan, South Korea,Australia, Thailand and the Philippines serve as thefoundation for America's continuing security role.

We are maintaining healthy relations with theAssociation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),which now includes Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand,Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei, Vietnam, Laos andBurma. We are also supporting regional dialogue-such as in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)-onthe full range of common security challenges. Bymeeting on confidence-building measures such assearch and rescue cooperation and peacekeeping, theARF can help enhance regional security andunderstanding.

Japan

The United States and Japan reaffirmed our bilateral security relationship in the April 1996 Joint Security Declaration. The alliance continues to be thecornerstone for achieving common security objectives and for maintaining a stable andprosperous environment for the Asia Pacific region aswe enter the twenty-first century. In September1997, both Governments issued the revised Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperationwhich will result in greater bilateral cooperation inpeacekeeping and humanitarian relief operations, insituations in areas surrounding Japan, and in thedefense of Japan itself. The revised Guidelines, likethe U.S.-Japan security relationship itself, are notdirected against any other country.

In April 1998, in order to support the new Guidelines,both governments agreed to a revised Acquisitionand Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA) which expands the exchange of provision of supplies andservices to include reciprocal provision of logistics support during situations surrounding Japan thathave an important influence on Japan's peace andsecurity. While the guidelines and its related effortshave specifically focused on regional security, bothcountries have continued to cooperate in theimplementation of the Special Action Committee onOkinawa (SACO) Final report. This effort initiatedplans and measures to realign, consolidate, andreduce U.S. facilities and areas in Okinawa in orderto ease the impact of U.S. Forces' presence on thepeople of Okinawa. Implementation of SACO willultimately aid in ensuring the maintenance of U.S.operational capabilities and force presence in theAsia-Pacific region.

U.S.-Japan security cooperation extends topromoting regional peace and stability, seeking universal adherence to the Nuclear Non-ProliferationTreaty, and addressing the dangers posed bytransfers of destabilizing conventional arms andsensitive dual-use goods and technologies. Ourcontinued progress in assisting open trade betweenour countries and our broad-ranging international cooperation, exemplified by the Common Agenda,provide a sound basis for our relations into the nextcentury.

Korean Peninsula

Tensions on the Korean Peninsula remain theprincipal threat to peace and stability in East Asia.The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)has publicly stated a preference for peaceful reunification, but continues to dedicate a large portionof dwindling resources to enhance the combat capability of its huge military forces. Renewed conflict has been prevented since 1953 by acombination of the Armistice Agreement, which brought an end to open hostilities; the United Nations Command, which has visibly represented the will ofthe UN Security Council to secure peace; and thephysical presence of U.S. and ROK troops in theCombined Forces Command, which hasdemonstrated the alliance's resolve.

The inauguration of Kim Dae-jung as President of theRepublic of Korea on February 25, 1998 marked animportant turning point on the Korean Peninsula. Itmarked the triumph of democracy in South Korea andthe first peaceful transition of power from the rulingparty to an opposition party. It was also a remarkable triumph for President Kim, who had been denied thePresidency in 1971 by voter intimidation and fraud,kidnapped and almost murdered by government agents, sentenced to death in 1991, imprisoned forsix years and in exile or under house arrest for overten years. President Kim personifies the victory ofdemocracy over dictatorship in South Korea.

President Kim has set a new course toward peaceand stability on the Korean Peninsula by openingnew channels for dialogue and seeking areas forcooperation between North and South. During their summit meeting in June 1998, President Clinton andPresident Kim discussed the situation on the Korean Peninsula, reaffirming South Korea's role as leadinterlocutor with the North Koreans and theimportance of our strong defense alliance. President Clinton expressed strong support for President Kim'svision of engagement and efforts toward reconciliation with the North. The United States isworking to create conditions of stability by maintaining solidarity with our South Korean ally, emphasizing America's commitment to shaping a peaceful andprosperous Korean Peninsula and ensuring that anisolated and struggling North Korea does not opt for amilitary solution to its political and economic problems.Peaceful resolution of the Korean conflict with a nonnuclear, reunified peninsula will enhance stability in theEast Asian region and is clearly in our strategic interest.

We are willing to improve bilateral political andeconomic ties with North Korea-consistent with theobjectives of our alliance with the ROK-to draw theNorth into more normal relations with the region andthe rest of the world. Our willingness to improve bilateral relations will continue to be commensuratewith the North's cooperation in efforts to reduce tensions on the peninsula. South Korea has set ashining example for nonproliferation by forswearingnuclear weapons, accepting safeguards, anddeveloping a peaceful nuclear program that brings benefits to the region. We are firm that North Koreamust freeze and dismantle its graphite-moderatedreactors and related facilities and fully comply with itsNPT obligations under the Agreed Framework. Wealso seek to cease North Korea's chemical andbiological weapon programs and ballistic missile proliferation activities. The United States, too, mustfulfill its obligations under the Agreed Framework andthe Administration will work with the Congress toensure the success of our efforts to address the North Korean nuclear threat. The North must also engage ina productive dialogue with South Korea; continue therecently revived United Nations Command-Korean People's Army General Officer Dialogue talks atPanmunjon; participate constructively in the Four PartyTalks among the United States, China, and North andSouth Korea to reduce tensions and negotiate a peace agreement; and support our efforts to recover theremains of American servicemen missing since theKorean War.

China

A stable, open, prosperous People's Republic ofChina (PRC) that assumes its responsibilities forbuilding a more peaceful world is clearly andprofoundly in our interests. The prospects for peaceand prosperity in Asia depend heavily on China's roleas a responsible member of the international community. China's integration into the international system of rules and norms will influence its ownpolitical and economic development, as well as itsrelations with the rest of the world. Our relationshipwith China will in large measure help to determine whether the 21st century is one of security, peace,and prosperity for the American people. Our successin working with China as a partner in building a stable international order depends on establishing aproductive relationship that will build sustained domestic support.

Our policy toward China is both principled andpragmatic: expanding our areas of cooperation while dealing forthrightly with our differences. Seeking toisolate China is clearly unworkable. Even our friendsand allies around the world would not support us; wewould succeed only in isolating ourselves and ourown policy. More importantly, choosing isolation overengagement would not make the world safer. Itwould make it more dangerous. It would undermine rather than strengthen our efforts to foster stability inAsia and halt the proliferation of weapons of massdestruction. It would hinder the cause of democracyand human rights in China, set back worldwide effortsto protect the environment, and cut off one of theworld's most important markets.

President Jiang Zemin's visit to the United States inOctober 1997-the first state visit by the President ofChina to the United States in twelve years-marked significant progress in the development of U.S.-PRCrelations. President Clinton's reciprocal visit toBeijing in June 1998-the first state visit by anAmerican president to China in this decade-furtherexpanded and strengthened our relations. The twosummits were important milestones toward building aconstructive U.S.-China strategic partnership.In their 1997 summit, the two Presidents agreed on anumber of steps to strengthen cooperation ininternational affairs: establishing a Washington Beijing presidential communications link to facilitate direct contact, regular presidential visits to eachother's capitals, and regular exchanges of visits bycabinet and sub-cabinet officials to consult onpolitical, military, security and arms control issues.They agreed to establish a consultation mechanismto strengthen military maritime safety-which willenable their maritime and air forces to avoid accidents, misunderstandings or miscalculations-and to hold discussions on humanitarian assistanceand disaster relief. In their June 1998 meeting, theyagreed to continue their regular summit meetings andto intensify the bilateral dialogue on security issues.Arms control and non-proliferation issues were highon the agenda for 1998 summit, which expanded andstrengthened the series of agreements that werereached at the 1997 summit. In Beijing, Presidents Clinton and Jiang announced that the United Statesand China will not target their strategic nuclear weapons at each other. They confirmed their common goal to halt the spread of weapons of massdestruction. We welcomed China's statement that itattaches importance to issues related to the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and missile nonproliferation and that it has begun to activelystudy joining the MTCR. Our two nations willcontinue consultations on MTCR issues in 1998.

Both sides agreed to further strengthen controls onthe export of dual-use chemicals and related production equipment and technology to assure theyare not used for production of chemical weapons,and China announced that it has expanded the list ofchemical precursors which it controls. The twoPresidents issued a joint statement calling forstrengthening of the Biological Weapons Conventionand early conclusion of a protocol establishing apractical and effective compliance mechanism andimproving transparency. They issued a joint statement affirming their commitment to ending theexport and indiscriminate use of anti-personnellandmines and to accelerating global humanitariandemining. We also reached agreement with Chinaon practices for end-use visits on U.S. hightechnology exports to China, which will establish aframework for such exports to China.

China is working with the United States on important regional security issues. In June 1998, China chaireda meeting of the permanent members of the UNSecurity Council to forge a common strategy formoving India and Pakistan away from a nuclear armsrace. China condemned both countries forconducting nuclear tests and joined us in urging themto conduct no more tests, to sign the ComprehensiveTest Ban Treaty, to avoid deploying or testing missiles, and to work to resolve their differences through dialogue. At the 1998 summit, Presidents Clinton and Jiang issued a joint statement on their shared interest in a peaceful and stable South Asiaand agreed to continue to coordinate their efforts tostrengthen peace and stability in that region. On theKorean Peninsula, China has become a force forpeace and stability, helping us to convince NorthKorea to freeze its dangerous nuclear program,playing a constructive role in the four-party peacetalks.

The United States and China are working tostrengthen cooperation in the field of lawenforcement and mutual legal assistance, including efforts to combat international organized crime,narcotics trafficking, alien smuggling, illegal immigration, counterfeiting and money laundering.We have established a joint liaison group for lawenforcement cooperation and assignedcounternarcotics officers to each other's embassies in1998.

Our key security objectives for the future include:

sustaining the strategic dialogue begun bythe recent summits and other high-level exchanges;

enhancing stability in the Taiwan Strait through peaceful approaches to cross-Strait issues and encouraging dialogue between Beijing and Taipei;

strengthening China's adherence tointernational nonproliferation norms,particularly in its export controls on ballistic missile and dual use technologies;

achieving greater openness andtransparency in China's military;

encouraging a constructive PRC role ininternational affairs through active cooperation in ARF, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC) andthe Northeast Asia Security Dialogue; andimproving law enforcement cooperation withPRC officials through increased liaison andtraining.

Southeast Asia

Our strategic interest in Southeast Asia centers ondeveloping regional and bilateral security andeconomic relationships that assist in conflict prevention and resolution and expand U.S.participation in the region's economies. U.S. security objectives in the region are to maintain our security alliances with Australia, Thailand and the Philippines,to sustain security access arrangements withSingapore and other ASEAN countries, and toencourage the emergence of a strong, cohesiveASEAN capable of enhancing regional stability andprosperity.

Our policy combines two approaches: First,maintaining our increasingly productive relationshipwith ASEAN-especially our security dialogue underthe ARF. Second, pursuing bilateral initiatives withindividual Southeast Asian nations to promote political stability, foster market-oriented economic reforms, and reduce or contain the effects of Asian organized crime, particularly the flow of heroin fromBurma and other countries in the region.

Promoting Prosperity

A prosperous and open Asia Pacific is key to theeconomic health of the United States. On the eve ofthe recent financial problems in Asia, the 18members of APEC contributed about one-half of total global gross domestic product and exports. Thirty percent of U.S. exports go to Asia, supporting millions of U.S. jobs, and we export more to Asia thanEurope. In states like California, Oregon andWashington, exports to Asia account for more thanhalf of each state's total exports. U.S. direct investments in Asia represent about one-fifth of totalU.S. direct foreign investment.

Our economic objectives in East Asia include recovery from the recent financial crisis, continued progress within APEC toward liberalizing trade andinvestment, increased U.S. exports to Asian countries through market-opening measures and leveling theplaying field for U.S. business, and WTO accessionfor China and Taiwan on satisfactory commercialterms. Opportunities for economic growth abound inAsia and underlie our strong commitment tomultilateral economic cooperation, such as via theannual APEC leaders meetings.

Promoting sustainable development, protecting theenvironment and coping with the global problem ofclimate change are important for ensuring long-termprosperity in the Asia Pacific region. The Kyoto Agreement was a major step forward in controllingthe greenhouse gases that are causing climate change, but its success depends on meaningful participation by key developing nations as well as theindustrialized nations of the world. Rapid economic growth in China and India make their participation essential to the global effort to control greenhousegases.

The Asian Financial Crisis

Over the last decade, the global economy hasentered a new era-an era of interdependence andopportunity. Americans have benefited greatly fromthe worldwide increase of trade and capital flows.This development has contributed to steady GNPgrowth, improvements in standards of living, morehigh paying jobs (particularly in export-oriented industries), and low inflation.

The United States has enormously important economic and national security interests at stake inEast Asia. Prolonged economic distress andfinancial instability will have an adverse effect on U.S.exports to the region, the competitiveness ofAmerican companies, and the well being of American workers. There also is a risk that if the current crisisis left unchecked its effects could spread beyondEast Asia. Simply put, we cannot afford to standback in hopes that the crisis will resolve itself. Whenwe act to help resolve the Asian financial crisis, weact to protect the well-being of the American people.In the face of this challenge, our primary objective isto help stabilize the current financial situation. Ourstrategy has four key elements: support for economic reforms; working with international financial institutions to provide structural and humanitarian assistance; providing bilateral humanitarian aid andcontingency bilateral financial assistance if needed;and urging strong policy actions by Japan and theother major economic powers to promote global growth.

We will continue to support South Korea, Thailandand Indonesia as they implement economic reforms designed to foster financial stability and investor confidence in order to attract the capital flows required to restore economic growth. These reform programs have at their core restructuring the financial sector, promoting greater transparency in trade andinvestment laws and regulations, and ending policy directed lending practices. All three nations face adifficult road ahead that will test their political will.The international community can continue to helpameliorate adverse consequences of the crisis, butonly resolute action to keep to the agreed policy course will bring a resumption of sustained growth.Although the Asian financial crisis is having a crippling effect, we believe the underlying fundamentals foreconomic recovery are good and are confident that fulland vigorous implementation of economic reforms combined with the efforts of the international community will lead to the restoration of economic growth to the countries of the region. U.S. initiatives inAPEC will open new opportunities for economic cooperation and permit U.S. companies to expand their involvement in substantial infrastructure planning andconstruction throughout the region. While our progressin APEC has been gratifying, we will explore options toencourage all Asia Pacific nations to pursue openmarkets.

The United States will continue to work with the IMF,the World Bank, other international financial institutions, the governments in East Asia and theprivate sector to help stabilize financial markets,restore investor confidence and achieve muchneeded reforms in the troubled East Asian economies. Our goal is to help the region recoverquickly and to build a solid, resilient foundation forfuture economic growth in the region.

China

Bringing the PRC more fully into the global trading system is manifestly in our national interest. China isone of the fastest growing markets for our goods andservices. As we look into the next century, ourexports to China will support hundreds of thousandsof jobs across our country. For this reason, we mustcontinue our normal trade treatment for China, asevery President has done since 1980, strengthening instead of undermining our economic relationship.An important part of integrating China into the marketbased world economic system is opening China'shighly protected market through lower border barriersand removal of distorting restraints on economic activity. We have negotiated landmark agreements tocombat piracy of intellectual property and advance theinterests of our creative industries. We have alsonegotiated-and vigorously enforced-agreements ontextile trade. At their 1997 and 1998 summits,President Clinton and President Jiang agreed to takea number of positive measures to expand U.S.-Chinatrade and economic ties. We will continue to pressChina to open its markets (in goods, services andagriculture) as it engages in sweeping economic reform.

It is in our interest that China become a member ofthe WTO; however, we have been steadfast inleading the effort to ensure that China's accession tothe WTO occurs on a commercial basis. China maintains many barriers that must be eliminated, andwe need to ensure that necessary reforms areagreed to before accession occurs. At the 1997summit, the two leaders agreed that China's fullparticipation in the multilateral trading system is intheir mutual interest. They agreed to intensify negotiations on market access, including tariffs, nontariff measures, services, standards and agriculture,and on implementation of WTO principles so thatChina can accede to the WTO on a commercial basisat the earliest possible date. They reiterated their commitment to this process in their 1998 summit.China has been a helpful partner in international efforts to stabilize the Asian financial crisis. Inresisting the temptation to devalue its currency,China has seen that its own interests lie in preventing another round of competitive devaluations that wouldhave severely damaged prospects for regional recovery. It has also contributed to the rescue packages for affected economies.

Japan

The Administration continues to make progress onincreasing market access in Asia's largest economy.Since the beginning of the first Clinton Administration,the United States and Japan have reached 35 trade agreements designed to open Japanese markets inkey sectors, including autos and auto parts,telecommunications, civil aviation, insurance andglass. The Administration also has intensified effortsto monitor and enforce trade agreements with Japanto ensure that they are fully implemented. TheUnited States also uses multilateral venues, such asWTO dispute settlement and negotiation of newmultilateral agreements, to further open markets andaccomplish our trade objectives with Japan.

During the period from 1993 to 1996, U.S. exports toJapan increased from $47.9 billion to $67.6 billion,and the bilateral trade deficit fell from $59.4 billion to$47.6 billion. The recent economic downturn inJapan, however, has reversed this positive trend withthe bilateral trade deficit for the first four months 1998already at $20.8 billion, up 32 percent from the sameperiod in 1996. Sustained global expansion andrecovery in Asia cannot be achieved when thesecond largest economy in the world, accounting formore than half of Asian output, is in recession andhas a weakened financial system.

Japan has a crucial role to play in Asia's economic recovery. Japan must generate substantial growth tohelp maintain a growing world economy and absorb agrowing share of imports from emerging markets. Todo this Japan must reform its financial sector,stimulate domestic demand, deregulate its economy,and further open its markets to foreign goods andservices. We look forward to substantial andeffective actions to achieve a domestic demand-ledrecovery, to restore health to the financial sector andto make progress on deregulation and opening markets. Strong, immediate, tangible actions by theJapanese Government are vital to make Japan againan engine of growth and to help spur a broadereconomic recovery in Asia, as well as reinvigorate acritical market for U.S. goods and services.

South Korea

the strain of the financial crisis. We are taking concretesteps to lessen the financial burden of military programs, including decreasing the scope of military contacts such as visits and exercises, and looking forways to reduce the impact of the crisis on security assistance programs. The Royal Thai armed forceshave earned high marks for their stabilizing influence.

Promoting DemocracySome have argued that democracy is unsuited for Asiaor at least for some Asian nations-that human rightsare relative and that Western support for internationalhuman rights standards simply mask a form of cultural imperialism. The democratic aspirations andachievements of the Asian peoples prove these arguments incorrect. We will continue to support those aspirations and to promote respect for human rights inall nations. Each nation must find its own form ofdemocracy, and we respect the variety of democratic institutions that have emerged in Asia. But there isno cultural justification for tyranny, torture or denial offundamental freedoms. Our strategy includes effortsto:

Thailand

Thailand, a key U.S. security partner in the region, alsofaces serious economic difficulties. The U.S.government continues to work with Thailand to ease

pursue a constructive, goal-oriented approach toachieving progress on human rights and rule oflaw issues with China;

foster a meaningful political dialogue between theruling authorities in Burma and the democratic opposition;

work with the new government of Indonesia topromote improved respect for human rights,strengthened democratic processes and aninternationally acceptable political solution in EastTimor; work with ASEAN to restore democracy toCambodia and encourage greater respect forhuman rights; 

and achieve the fullest possible accounting of missingU.S. service members, promote greater respectfor human rights in Vietnam, and press for fullVietnamese implementation of the ResettlementOpportunity for Vietnamese Returnees (ROVR)program.

At their summit meeting in June 1998, President Clinton reaffirmed to President Kim that the United States will continue its strong support for his efforts toreform the Korean economy, liberalize trade andinvestment, strengthen the banking system andimplement the IMF program. President Clinton reiterated our commitment to provide bilateral financeif needed under appropriate conditions. The twopresidents discussed a number of concrete steps topromote growth in both our countries and exploredways to more fully open our markets and to furtherintegrate the Republic of Korea into the global economy, including new discussions on a bilateral investment treaty. They also signed an Open Skies agreement which permits unrestricted air service between our two countries.

The Western Hemisphere

Our hemisphere enters the twenty-first century with anunprecedented opportunity to secure a future ofstability and prosperity-building on the fact that every nation in the hemisphere except Cuba is democraticand committed to free market economies. The end ofarmed conflict in Central America and otherimprovements in regional security have coincided withremarkable political and economic progress throughoutthe Americas. The people of the Americas are already taking advantage of the vast opportunities being created as emerging markets are connected through electronic commerce and as robust democracies allow individuals to more fully express their preferences.

Sub-regional political, economic and security cooperation in North America, the Caribbean, Central America, the Andean region and the Southern Conehave contributed positively to peace and prosperity throughout the hemisphere. Equally important, thepeople of the Americas have reaffirmed their commitment to combat together the difficult new threatsof narcotics and corruption. U.S. strategy is to securethe benefits of the new climate in the hemisphere while safeguarding the United States and our friends againstthese threats.

The 1994 Summit of the Americas in Miami produced hemispheric agreement to negotiate the Free TradeArea of the Americas (FTAA) and agreements onmeasures that included continued economic reformand enhanced cooperation on issues such as theenvironment, counternarcotics, money launderingand corruption. Celebrating the region's embrace ofdemocracy and free markets, that historic meeting committed the United States to a more cooperative relationship with the hemisphere. U.S. agencieshave used the Miami Summit Action Plan to establish productive relationships and strengthen cooperationwith their Latin American and Caribbean counterpartsin a host of areas.

Our engagement with the hemisphere reached unprecedented levels in 1997 and 1998. In May1997, President Clinton traveled to Mexico for asummit meeting with President Zedillo, then heldsummits with Central American leaders in Costa Ricaand Caribbean leaders in Barbados, highlighting theimportance of working with our neighbors to solve problems of great concern to Americans such asdrugs, immigration and transnational crime. InOctober 1997, in Venezuela, Brazil and Argentina,the President underscored opportunities forcooperation with vibrant democracies and their fastgrowing markets.

This substantial engagement with the hemisphere atthe beginning of the President's second termcontinued at the Second Summit of the Americas inSantiago, Chile in April 1998. At the Summit, theleaders of the hemisphere focused on the areas needed to prepare our citizens for the 21 century:education, democracy, economic integration andpoverty relief.

Enhancing Security

The principal security concerns in the hemisphere aretransnational in nature, such as drug trafficking,organized crime, money laundering, illegal immigration, and terrorism. In addition, ourhemisphere is leading the way in recognizing thedangers to democracy produced by corruption andrule of law issues. These threats, especially narcotics,produce adverse social effects that undermine thesovereignty, democracy and national security ofnations in the hemisphere.

We are striving to eliminate the scourge of drugtrafficking in our hemisphere. At the Santiago Summit,the assembled leaders launched a MultilateralCounterdrug Alliance to better organize andcoordinate efforts in the hemisphere to stem theproduction and distribution of drugs. The centerpieceof this alliance will be a mechanism to evaluate eachmember country's progress in achieving their agreedcounternarcotics goals. Summit leaders also agreedto improve cooperation on extraditing andprosecuting individuals charged with narcotics trafficking and related crimes; strengthen efforts against money laundering and forfeiture of assetsused in criminal activity; reinforce international andnational mechanisms to halt illicit traffic and diversionof chemical precursors; enhance national programsfor fostering greater awareness of the dangers ofdrug abuse, preventing illicit drug consumption andproviding treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration;and eliminate illicit crops through national alternative development programs, eradication and interdiction.We are also pursuing a number of bilateral andregional counternarcotics initiatives. As part of ourpartnership with Mexico, we are striving to increasecounterdrug and law enforcement cooperation, while inthe Caribbean we are intensifying a coordinated efforton counternarcotics and law enforcement. Thereduction in trade barriers resulting from the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) allows moreinspection resources to be directed to thwartingattempts by organized crime to exploit the expanding volume of trade for increased drug smuggling.

The Santiago Summit addressed other transnational security concerns as well. Summit leaders called forthe rapid ratification and entry into force of the 1997Inter-American Convention to Combat the IllicitManufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,Ammunition Explosives and Related Material. Theyalso agreed to encourage states to accede to theinternational conventions related to terrorism andconvene, under the auspices of the OAS, the Second Specialized Inter-American Conference to evaluatethe progress attained and to define future courses ofaction for the prevention, combat and elimination ofterrorism.

We are advancing regional security cooperation through bilateral security dialogues, multilateral effortsin the Organization of American States (OAS) andSummit of the Americas on transparency and regional confidence and security building measures, exercisesand exchanges with key militaries (principally focusedon peacekeeping), and regular Defense Ministerials.Working with Argentina, Brazil and Chile, the otherthree guarantor nations of the Peru-Ecuador peace process, the United States has brought the parties closer to a permanent solution to this decades-oldborder dispute, the resolution of which is important toregional stability. The Military Observer Mission,Ecuador-Peru (MOMEP), composed of the fourguarantor nations, successfully separated the warring factions, created the mutual confidence and securityamong the guarantor nations. The U.S. sponsored multilateral military exercise focused on combatingdrug trafficking, supporting disaster relief (particularly important because of the El Nino phenomenon) andparticipation in international peacekeeping. It hasspurred unprecedented exercises among neighboring countries in Central America and the Southern Cone.

Additionally, the Southern Cone has increasingly shared the burden of international peacekeeping operations. The Santiago Summit tasked the OAS toexpand topics relating to confidence and security building measures with the goal of convening aSpecial Conference on Security by the beginning ofthe next decade. Several countries in the regionhave joined our call to promote transparency bypublishing whiachieve the fullest possible accounting of missingU.S. service members, promote greater respectfor human rights in Vietnam, and press for fullVietnamese implementation of the ResettlementOpportunity for Vietnamese Returnees (ROVR)program.te papers on defense. Our efforts toencourage multilateral cooperation are enhancing confidence and security within the region and willhelp expand our cooperative efforts to combat thetransnational threats to the Western Hemisphere,particularly in Columbia where social, political andcriminal violence is spilling across borders. We arealso working to ensure successful transfer ofstewardship of the Panama Canal to the Panamanian people.

In light of the advances in democratic stability throughout Latin America and mindful of the need forrestraint, the Administration has moved to case-bycase consideration of requests for advanced conventional arms transfers, on par with other areas ofthe world. Such requests will be reviewed in a way thatwill serve our objectives of promoting defense cooperation, restraint in arms acquisition and military budgets, and an increased focus on peacekeeping,counternarcotics efforts and disaster relief.

Promoting Prosperity

Economic growth and integration in the Americas willprofoundly affect the prosperity of the United Statesin the 21 century. Latin America has become thefastest growing economic region in the world and ourfastest growing export market. In 1998, our exports toLatin America and the Caribbean are expected toexceed those to the EU.

Building on the vision articulated at Miami in 1994and the groundwork laid by trade ministers over thelast four years, the Santiago Summit launched formal negotiations to initiate the FTAA by 2005. Thenegotiations will cover a broad range of important issues, including market access, investment,services, government procurement, dispute settlement, agriculture, intellectual property rights,competition policy, subsidies, anti-dumping andcountervailing duties. A Committee on Electronic Commerce will explore the implications of electronic commerce for the design of the FTAA, and aCommittee on Civil Society will provide a formal mechanism for labor, business, consumer,environmental and other non-government organizations to make recommendations on thenegotiations so that all citizens can benefit fromtrade. Governments also will cooperate on promotingcore labor standards recognized by the InternationalLabor Organization.

We seek to advance the goal of an integrated hemisphere of free market democracies byconsolidating NAFTA's gains and obtaining Congressional Fast Track trade agreement implementing authority. Since the creation of NAFTA,our exports to Mexico have risen significantly while theAgreement helped stabilize Mexico through its worst financial crisis in modern history. Considering thatMexico has now become our second-largest export market, it is imperative that its economy remain open tothe United States and NAFTA helps to ensure that.We will continue working with Mexico and interested private parties to continue the mutually beneficial tradewith our largest trading partner and neighbor to thenorth, Canada. We are also committed to delivering onthe President's promise to negotiate a comprehensivefree trade agreement with Chile because of itsextraordinary economic performance and its active rolein promoting hemispheric economic integration.While we support the freer flow of goods andinvestment, there is also reason to be sensitive to theconcerns of smaller economies during the period oftransition to the global economy of the 21 century.To address this problem, and in light of the increased competition NAFTA presents to Caribbean trade, wewill seek Congressional approval to provide enhanced trade benefits under the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) to help prepare that region forparticipation in the FTAA. With the assistance ofinstitutions such as OPIC, we will encourage theprivate sector to take the lead in developing smalland medium-sized businesses in the Caribbean through the increased flow of investment capital. Wemust also encourage Caribbean countries andterritories to implement programs to attract foreignand domestic investment.

At the Santiago Summit, the hemisphere's leaders reaffirmed that all citizens must participate in theopportunities and prosperity created by free market democracy. They pledged to ensure access tofinancial services for a significant number of the 50million micro, small and medium size enterprises inthe hemisphere by the year 2000, to work withmultilateral institutions and regional organizations toinvest about $400-500 million over the next threeyears, and to streamline and decentralize property registration and titling procedures and assure accessto justice for the poor. Governments will enhance participation by promoting core labor standards recognized by the ILO, strengthening gender equity,working to eliminate exploitative child labor,negotiating a new Declaration of Principles onFundamental Rights of Workers, and promoting education and training for indigenous populations.To improve quality of life, Summit leaders pledged topursue elimination of measles by the year 2000 andreduce the incidence of diseases such as pneumoniaand mumps by the year 2002, to strengthen regional networks of health information such as throughtelemedicine, to give highest priority to reducing infant malnutrition, and to strengthen cooperation toimplement Santa Cruz Sustainable DevelopmentPlan of Action.

Promoting Democracy

Many Latin American nations have made tremendous advances in democracy and economic progress overthe last several years. But our ability to sustain thehemispheric agenda depends in part on meeting thechallenges posed by weak democratic institutions,persistently high unemployment and crime rates, andserious income disparities. In some Latin American countries, citizens will not fully realize the benefits ofpolitical liberalization and economic growth without regulatory, judicial, law enforcement and educational reforms, as well as increased efforts to integrate allmembers of society into the formal economy.

At the Santiago Summit, the hemisphere's leaders reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening democracy, justice and human rights. They agreedto intensify efforts to promote democratic reforms atthe regional and local level, protect the rights ofmigrant workers and their families, improve thecapabilities and competence of civil and criminal justice systems, and encourage a strong and activecivil society. They pledged to promptly ratify theInter-American Convention Against Corruption tostrengthen the integrity of governmental institutions.They supported the creation of a Special Rapporteurfor Freedom of Expression as part of the InterAmerican Commission for Human Rights. TheRapporteur will help resolve human rights cases involving the press and focus international attentionon attacks against the hemisphere's emerging Fourth Estate, as their investigative reporting provokes increasing threats from drug traffickers and othercriminal elements. Summit leaders also agreed toestablish an Inter-American Justice Studies Center tofacilitate training of personnel, to exchange ofinformation and other forms of technical cooperationto improve judicial systems, to end impunity, combat

corruption and provide protection from rising domestic and international crime, and to create asecure legal environment for trade and investment.The hemisphere's leaders agreed at the Santiago Summit that education is the centerpiece of reformsaimed at making democracy work for all the people ofthe Americas. The Summit Action Plan adopted atSantiago will build on the achievements of the 1994Miami Summit. It will advance numerous cooperative efforts based on the guiding principles of equity,quality, relevance and efficiency. The SantiagoPlan's targets are to ensure by the year 2010 primary education for 100% of children and access to quality secondary education for at least 75% of young people. The plan also includes solid commitments tofinance schools, textbooks, teacher training,technology for education, to create education partnerships between the public and private sectors,to use technology to link schools across national boundaries and to increase international exchangesof students.

We are also seeking to strengthen norms for defense establishments that are supportive of democracy,transparency, respect for human rights and civilian control in defense matters. Through continued engagement with regional armed forces, facilitated byour own modest military activities and presence in theregion, we are helping to transform civil-military relations. Through initiatives such as the Defense Ministerial of the Americas and the Center forHemispheric Defense Studies, we are increasing civilian expertise in defense affairs and reinforcing thepositive trend in civilian control.

Haiti and Cuba are of special concern to the United States. The restoration of democracy in Haiti remainsa positive example for the hemisphere. In Haiti wecontinue to support respect for human rights andeconomic growth by a Haitian government capable ofmanaging its own security and paving the way for a fairpresidential election in 2000. Our efforts to train lawenforcement officers in Haiti have transformed thepolice from a despised and feared instrument ofrepression to an accountable public safety agency.

We are committed to working with our partners in theregion and in the international community to meet thechallenge of institutionalizing Haiti's economic andpolitical development. Haiti will benefit from aCaribbean-wide acceleration of growth and investment,stimulated in part by enhancement of CBI benefits.The United States remains committed to promoting apeaceful transition to democracy in Cuba andforestalling a mass exodus that would endanger thelives of migrants and the security of our borders. While maintaining pressure on the regime to make politicaland economic reforms, we continue to encourage theemergence of a civil society to assist the transition todemocracy when the change comes. In March 1998,President Clinton announced a number of measures designed to build on the success of the Pope's January1998 visit to Cuba, expand the role of the Catholic Church and other elements of civil society, andincrease humanitarian assistance. As the Cuban people feel greater incentive to take charge of theirown future, they are more likely to stay at home andbuild the informal and formal structures that will maketransition easier. Meanwhile, we remain firmly committed to bilateral migration accords that ensure migration in safe, legal and orderly channels.

The Middle East, Southwest and South Asia

The May 1998 Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests clearly illustrate that a wide range of events in thisregion can have a significant impact on key U.S.security objectives. Choices made in the Middle East,Southwest and South Asia will determine whetherterrorists operating in and from the region are deniedthe support they need to perpetrate their crimes,whether weapons of mass destruction will imperil theregion and the world, whether the oil and gas fields ofthe Caucasus and Central Asia become reliable energy sources, whether the opium harvest in Afghanistan iseliminated, and whether a just and lasting peace canbe established between Israel and the Arab countries.

Enhancing Security

The United States has enduring interests in pursuing ajust, lasting and comprehensive Middle East peace,ensuring the security and well-being of Israel, helpingour Arab friends provide for their security, andmaintaining the free flow of oil at reasonable prices.Our strategy reflects those interests and the unique characteristics of the region as we work to extend therange of peace and stability.

The Middle East Peace Process

An historic transformation has taken place in thepolitical landscape of the Middle East: peace agreements are taking hold, requiring concerted implementation efforts. The United States-as anarchitect and sponsor of the peace process-has aclear national interest in seeing the process deepenand widen to include all Israel's neighbors. We willcontinue our steady, determined leadership-standingwith those who take risks for peace, standing againstthose who would destroy it, lending our good officeswhere we can make a difference and helping bring theconcrete benefits of peace to people's daily lives.Future progress will require movement in the followingareas:

continued Israeli-Palestinian engagement onremaining issues in the Interim Agreement,and negotiation of permanent status issues;resuming Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese negotiations with the objective of achievingpeace treaties; andnormalization of relations between Arab statesand Israel.

Southwest Asia

In Southwest Asia, the United States remains focused on deterring threats to regional stability,countering threats posed by WMD and protecting thesecurity of our regional partners, particularly from Iraqand Iran. We will continue to encourage members ofthe Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to work closely oncollective defense and security arrangements, helpindividual GCC states meet their appropriate defense requirements and maintain our bilateral defense agreements.

We will maintain an appropriate military presence inSouthwest Asia using a combination of ground, airand naval forces. As a result of the confrontationwith Iraq in late 1997 and early 1998 over to Iraqi interference with UN inspection teams, we increasedour continuous military presence in the Gulf to backour on-going efforts to bring Iraq into compliance withUN Security Council resolutions. Our forces in theGulf are backed by our ability to rapidly reinforce theregion in time of crisis, which we demonstrated convincingly in late 1997 and early 1998. We remain committed to enforcing the no-fly zones over northernand southern Iraq, which are essential for implementing the UN resolutions and preventing Saddam fromtaking large scale military action against Kuwait orthe Kurd and Shia minorities in Iraq.

We would like to see Iraq's reintegration into theinternational community; however, we have madeclear that Iraq must comply with all relevant UNSecurity Council resolutions. Saddam Hussein mustcease the cynical manipulation of UN humanitarian programs and cooperate with Security Council Resolution 1153, which authorizes increased humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq. Iraqmust also move from its posture of deny, delay andobscure to a posture of cooperation and compliancewith the UN Security Council resolutions designed torid Iraq of WMD and their delivery systems. Iraqmust also comply with the memorandum ofunderstanding reached with UN Secretary GeneralKofi Annan in February 1998. Our policy is directednot against the people of Iraq but against theaggressive behavior of the government. Until thatbehavior changes, our goal is containing the threat Saddam Hussein poses to Iraq's neighbors, the freeflow of Gulf oil and broader U.S. interests in theMiddle East.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing thebehavior of the Iranian government in several keyareas, including its efforts to obtain weapons of massdestruction and long-range missiles, its support forterrorism and groups that violently oppose the peace process, its attempts to undermine friendly governments in the region, and its development ofoffensive military capabilities that threaten our GCCpartners and the flow of oil.

There are signs of change in Iranian policies. InDecember 1997, Iranian officials welcomed Chairman Arafat to the Islamic Summit in Tehran and said that,although they did not agree with the peace process,they would not seek to impose their views and would accept what the Palestinians could accept. InJanuary 1998, President Khatemi publicly denounced terrorism and condemned the killing of innocent Israelis. Iran's record in the war against drugs hasgreatly improved and it has received high marks fromthe UN for its treatment of more than two million Iraqiand Afghan refugees. Iran is participating indiplomatic efforts to bring peace and stability toAfghanistan and is making a welcome effort toimprove relations with its neighbors in the Gulf.

We view these developments with interest, both withregard to the possibility of Iran assuming its rightfulplace in the world community and the chance forbetter bilateral ties. We also welcome statements byPresident Khatemi that suggest a possibility ofdialogue with the United States, and are taking concrete steps in that direction. This month, weimplemented a new, more streamlined procedure forissuing visas to Iranians who travel to the United States frequently. We also revised our Consular Travel Warning for Iran so that it better reflects current attitudes in Iran towards American visitors.We have supported cultural and academic exchanges, and facilitated travel to the United Statesby many Iranians.

However, these positive signs must be balanced against the reality that Iran's support for terrorism hasnot yet ceased, serious violations of human rights persist, its efforts to develop long range missiles,including the 1,300 kilometer-range Shahab-3 it flight tested in July 1998, and its efforts to acquire WMDcontinue. The United States will continue to opposeany country selling or transferring to Iran materialsand technologies that could be used to develop longrange missiles or weapons of mass destruction.Similarly, we oppose Iranian efforts to sponsor terror.We are ready to explore further ways to build mutual confidence and avoid misunderstandings with Iran.We will strengthen our cooperation with allies toencourage positive changes in Iranian behavior. If adialogue can be initiated and sustained in a way thataddresses the concerns of both sides, then theUnited States would be willing to develop with theIslamic Republic a road map leading to normal relations.

South Asia

South Asia has experienced an important expansion ofdemocracy and economic reform. Our strategy isdesigned to help the peoples of that region enjoy thefruits of democracy and greater stability by helping resolve long-standing conflict and implementing confidence-building measures. Regional stability andimproved bilateral ties are also important for U.S. economic interests in a region that contains a fifth of theworld's population and one of its most important emerging markets. We seek to establish relationshipswith India and Pakistan that are defined in terms oftheir own individual merits and reflect the full weightand range of U.S. strategic, political and economic interests in each country. In addition, we seek to workclosely with regional countries to stem the flow of illegaldrugs from South Asia, most notably from Afghanistan.The United States has long urged India and Pakistan totake steps to reduce the risk of conflict and to bringtheir nuclear and missile programs into conformity withinternational standards. The Indian and Pakistani nuclear test explosions were unjustified and threatento spark a dangerous nuclear arms race in Asia. Asa result of those tests and in accordance with ourlaws the United States imposed sanctions againstIndia and Pakistan. The sanctions include termination of assistance except for humanitarian assistance for food or other agricultural commodities;termination of sales of defense articles or services;termination of foreign military financing; denial of nonagricultural credit, credit guarantees or other financial assistance by any agency of the U.S. Government;prohibiting U.S. banks from making any loan orproviding any credit to the governments of India andPakistan except for the purpose of purchasing food orother agricultural commodities; and prohibiting exportof specific goods and technology subject to export licensing by the Commerce Department.

India and Pakistan are contributing to a self-defeatingcycle of escalation that does not add to the securityof either country. They have put themselves at oddswith the international community over these nucleartests. In concert with the other permanent membersof the UN Security Council and the G-8 nations, theUnited States has called on both nations to renounce further nuclear tests, to sign the Comprehensive TestBan Treaty immediately and without conditions, andto resume their direct dialogue and take decisivesteps to reduce tensions in South Asia. We alsostrongly urge these states to refrain from any actions,such as testing, deployment or weaponization ofballistic missiles, that would further undermine regional and global stability. And we urge them tojoin the clear international consensus in support ofnonproliferation and to join in negotiations in Genevafor a cut off of fissile material production.

Promoting Prosperity

The United States has two principle economic objectives in the region: to promote regional economic cooperation and development, and to ensureunrestricted flow of oil from the region. We seek topromote regional trade and cooperation on infrastructure through the multilateral track of the peace process,including revitalization of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) economic summits.

The United States depends on oil for about 40 percentof its primary energy needs and roughly half of our oilneeds are met with imports. Although we import lessthan 10% of Persian Gulf exports, our allies in Europeand Japan account for about 85% of these exports.Previous oil shocks and the Gulf War underscore thestrategic importance of the region and show the impactthat an interruption of oil supplies can have on theworld's economy. Appropriate responses to eventssuch as Iraq's invasion of Kuwait can limit the magnitude of the crisis. Over the longer term, U.S. dependence on access to these and other foreign oilsources will remain important as our reserves aredepleted. The United States must remain vigilant toensure unrestricted access to this critical resource.Thus, we will continue to demonstrate U.S. commitment and resolve in the Persian Gulf.

Promoting Democracy

We encourage the spread of democratic values throughout the Middle East and Southwest and SouthAsia and will pursue this objective by a constructive dialogue with countries in the region. In Iran, forexample, we hope the nation's leaders will carry outthe people's mandate for a government that respectsand protects the rule of law, both in its internal andexternal affairs. We will promote responsible indigenous moves toward increasing political participation and enhancing the quality of governanceand will continue to vigorously challenge manygovernments in the region to improve their human rights records. Respect for human rights alsorequires rejection of terrorism. If the nations in theregion are to safeguard their own citizens from thethreat of terror, they cannot tolerate acts ofindiscriminate violence against civilians, nor can theyoffer refuge to those who commit such acts.

U.S. policies in the Middle East and Southwest Asiaare not anti-Islamic-an allegation made by someopponents of our efforts to help bring lasting peaceand stability to the region. Islam is the fastest growing religious faith in the United States. Werespect deeply its moral teachings and its role as asource of inspiration and instruction for hundreds ofmillions of people around the world. U.S. policy inthe region is directed at the actions of governmentsand terrorist groups, not peoples or faiths. Thestandards we would like all the nations in the regionto observe are not merely Western, but universal.

Africa

In recent years, the United States has supported significant change in Africa with considerable success: multi-party democracies are more commonand elections are more frequent and open, human rights are more widely respected, the press is morefree, U.S.-Africa trade is expanding, and a pragmatic consensus on the need for economic reform isemerging. A new, post-colonial generation ofleadership is reaching maturity in Africa, with moredemocratic and pragmatic approaches to solving their countries' problems and developing their human andnatural resources.

To further those successes, President Clinton madean unprecedented 12-day trip to Africa in March-April1998. With President Museveni of Uganda, he cohosted the Entebbe Summit for Peace and Prosperityto advance cooperation on conflict prevention, human rights and economic integration. The summit wasattended by Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia,Presidents Moi of Kenya, Mkapa of Tanzania,Bizimungu of Rwanda and Kabila of Congo. Duringthe trip, the President unveiled a number of newprograms to support democracy, prosperity andopportunity, including initiatives on education, rule oflaw, food security, trade and investment, aviation,and conflict resolution. President Clinton directly addressed the violent conflicts that have threatened African democracy and prosperity.

Sustaining our success in Africa will require that weidentify those issues that most directly affect ourinterests and where we can make a difference through efficient targeting of our resources. A keychallenge is to engage the remaining autocratic regimes to encourage those countries to follow theexample of other African countries that are successfully implementing political and economic reforms.

Enhancing Security

Serious transnational security threats emanate frompockets of Africa, including state-sponsored terrorism, narcotics trafficking, international crime,environmental damage and disease. These threatscan only be addressed through effective, sustained engagement in Africa. We have already madesignificant progress in countering some of these threats-investing in efforts to combat environmental damage and disease, leading international efforts tohalt the proliferation of land mines and the deminingof Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda, Ethiopiaand Eritrea. We continue efforts to reduce the flow ofnarcotics through Africa and to curtail international criminal activity based in Africa. We seek to keepAfrica free of weapons of mass destruction bysupporting South Africa's nuclear disarmament andaccession to the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state,securing the indefinite and unconditional extension ofthe NPT, and promoting establishment of the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone.

Libya and Sudan continue to pose a threat to regional stability and the national security and foreign policy interests of the United States. Our policy towardLibya is designed to block its efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction and development ofconventional military capabilities that threaten itsneighbors, and to compel Libya to cease its supportfor terrorism and its attempts to undermine othergovernments in the region. The government of Libyahas continued these activities despite calls by theSecurity Council that it demonstrate by concrete actions its renunciation of terrorism. Libya alsocontinues to defy the United Nations by refusing toturn over the two defendants in the terrorist bombingof Pan Am 103. We remain determined that theperpetrators of this act and the attack on UTA 772 bebrought to justice. We have moved to counterSudan's support for international terrorism andregional destabilization by imposing comprehensive sanctions on the Khartoum regime, continuing topress for the regime's isolation through the UNSecurity Council, and enhancing the ability ofSudan's neighbors to resist Khartoum-backedinsurgencies in their countries through our FrontlineStates initiative.

Persistent conflict and continuing political instability insome African countries remain chronic obstacles toAfrica's development and to U.S. interests there,including unhampered access to oil and other vital natural resources. Our efforts to resolve conflict include working to fully implement the LusakaAccords in Angola, sustaining the fragile newgovernment in Liberia, supporting the recently restored democratic government in Sierra Leone andthe Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) efforts to ensure security there, and achieving a peaceful, credible transition to democratic government in Nigeria, theDemocratic Republic of the Congo and CongoBrazzaville.To foster regional efforts to promote prosperity,stability and peace in Africa, the United States in1996 launched the African Crisis Response Initiative(ACRI) to work with Africans to enhance their capacity to conduct effective peacekeeping andhumanitarian operations. We are coordinating withthe French, British, other donor countries and African governments in developing a sustainable plan ofaction. The United States has already trained battalions from Uganda, Senegal, Malawi, Mali andGhana, and is planning to train troops in Benin andCote D'Ivoire later this year. We are consulting closely on ACRI activity with the UN Department ofPeacekeeping Operations, the Organization ofAfrican Unity (OAU) and its Crisis Management Center, and African sub-regional organizations already pursuing similar capacity enhancements. Wehope and expect that other African countries will alsoparticipate in the effort in the future, building a welltrained, interoperable, local capacity forpeacekeeping and humanitarian operations in aregion that has been fraught with turbulence andcrisis and all too dependent upon outside assistanceto deal with these problems.

On April 1, 1998, President Clinton announced thatthe United States will be establishing the African Center for Security Studies (ACSS). The ACSS willbe a regional center modeled after the George C.Marshall Center in Germany, designed inconsultation with African nations and intended topromote the exchange of ideas and information tailored specifically for African concerns. The goal isfor ACSS to be a source of academic yet practical instruction in promoting the skills necessary to makeeffective national security decisions in democratic governments, and engage African military and civilian defense leaders in a substantive dialogue about defense policy planning in democracies.

Promoting Prosperity

A stable, democratic, prosperous Africa will be abetter economic partner, a better partner for securityand peace, and a better partner in the fights againstdrug trafficking, crime, terrorism, disease andenvironmental degradation. An economically dynamic Africa will be possible only when Africa isfully integrated into the global economy. Our aim,therefore, is to assist African nations to implement economic reforms, create favorable climates for tradeand investment, and achieve sustainable development. A majority of sub-Saharan Africa's 48countries have adopted market-oriented economicand political reforms in the past seven years.To support this positive trend, the President hasproposed the Partnership for Economic Growth andOpportunity in Africa to support the economic transformation underway in Africa. TheAdministration is working closely with Congress toimplement key elements of this initiative throughrapid passage of the African Growth and OpportunityAct. By significantly broadening market access,spurring growth in Africa and helping the poorest nations eliminate or reduce their bilateral debt, thisbill will better enable us to help African nations undertake difficult economic reforms and build betterlives for their people through sustainable growth anddevelopment.

Further integrating Africa into the global economy hasobvious political and economic benefits. It will alsodirectly serve U.S. interests by continuing to expandan already important new market for U.S. exports.The more than 700 million people of sub-SaharanAfrica represent one of the world's largest largely untapped markets. Although the United States enjoys only a seven percent market share in Africa,already 100,000 American jobs depend on ourexports there. Increasing both the U.S. market shareand the size of the African market will bring tangible benefits to U.S. workers and increase prosperity andeconomic opportunity in Africa. To encourage U.S.trade with and investment in Africa, we are pursuing several new initiatives and enhancements to thePartnership for Economic Growth and Opportunity,including greater market access, targeted technical assistance, enhanced bilateral and World Bank debtrelief, and increased bilateral trade ties.To further our trade objectives in Africa, the President inaugurated the Ron Brown Commercial Center inJohannesburg, South Africa on March 28, 1998. TheCenter, which is operated and funded by theDepartment of Commerce, provides support forAmerican companies looking to enter or expand intothe sub-Saharan African market. It promotes U.S.exports through a range of support programs andfacilitates business contacts and partnerships between African and American businesses. TheCenter also serves as a base for other agencies suchas the Export-Import Bank, the Trade Development Agency and USTR to expand their assistance tobusiness.

Because safe air travel and secure airports arenecessary for increasing trade, attracting investment,and expanding tourism, the President on April 1,1998 announced the "Safe Skies for Africa" initiative.The goals of this $1.2 million program-funded by theDepartments of State and Transportation-are towork in partnership with Africa to increase thenumber of sub-Saharan African countries that meetICAO standards for aviation safety, improve securityat 8-12 airports in the region within 3 years, andimprove regional air navigation services in Africa byusing modern satellite-based navigation aids andcommunications technology. The initiative focuseson safety assessments and security surveys inselected countries and formulating action plans together with Africa civil aviation authorities to bring aviation safety and security practices in Africa up toaccepted world standards.

To support the desire of African nations to invest in abetter and healthier future for their children, thePresident on March 24, 1998 announced three newinitiatives to improve educational standards, ensure adequate food and agricultural production, and fightthe deadly infectious diseases that claim the lives oftoo many African children.

The Education for Development andDemocracy Initiative seeks to boost African integration into the global community byimproving the quality of, and technology for,education in Africa. The initiative is centeredon community resource centers, public private partnerships, and educating andempowering girls. We plan on spending approximately $120 million over two years insupport of this initiative.

The Africa Food Security Initiative will assist African nations in strengthening agricultureand food security in a number of key areas,including production of healthy andalternative crops, better market efficiencyand distribution of existing crops, increasedtrade and investment in agricultural industries, attacking crop diseases, andincreasing access to agricultural technology systems to assist with increased cropproduction and distribution. Our pilot budgetfor the first two years of the initiative will be$61 million, which complements USAID'scurrent investments in these efforts.

The third initiative is combating the infectious diseases that claim many young lives. Tohelp combat malaria, we will provide anadditional $1 million grant to provide furtherassistance to the Multilateral Initiative onMalaria. The grant will focus on continuing educational seminars and will support theRegional Malaria Lab in Mali to reinforce itsposition as a regional center of excellence inAfrica. This effort will complement ourongoing Infectious Disease Initiative forAfrica that focuses on surveillance, response,prevention and building local resistance toinfectious diseases.

Promoting Democracy

In Africa as elsewhere, democracies have provedmore peaceful, stable and reliable partners withwhich we can work and are more likely to pursuesound economic policies. We will continue to work tosustain the important progress Africans haveachieved to date and to broaden the growing circle ofAfrican democracies.Restoration of democracy and respect for human rights in Nigeria has long been one of our major objectives in Africa. In June 1998, President Clinton reaffirmed to Nigeria's new leadership the friendshipof the United States for the people of Nigeria andunderscored our desire for improved bilateral relations in the context of Nigeria taking swift andsignificant steps toward a successful transition to ademocratically elected civilian government thatrespects the human rights of its citizens. The releaseof some political prisoners by the Nigerian government is an encouraging sign, but much moreneeds to be done and the United States will continueto press for a credible transition to a democratic,civilian government.

Through President Clinton's $30 million Great Lakes Justice Initiative, the United States will work with boththe people and governments of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi to support judicial systems which are impartial, credible,effective and inclusive. This initiative seeks tostrengthen judicial bodies, such as relevant Ministriesof Justice and Interior; improve the functioning ofcourt systems, prosecutors, police and prison systems; work with national officials on specific problem areas such as creation of civilian police forces and legal assistance programs; support training programs for police and judiciary officials;develop improved court administration systems;provide human rights training for military personneland support prosecution of abuses perpetrated bymilitary personnel; demobilize irregular elements ofstanding armies and reintegrate them into societyand programs; and demobilize child soldiers.In addition, we will work with our allies to find aneffective formula for promoting stability, democracyand respect for human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo so that it and a democratic Nigeriacan become the regional centers for economic growth, and democratic empowerment that they canand should be. In order to help post-apartheid South Africa achieve its economic, political, democratic andsecurity goals for all its citizens, we will continue toprovide substantial bilateral assistance, vigorously promote U.S. trade and investment, and pursue close cooperation and support for our mutual interests andgoals through the versatile Binational Commission chaired by the Vice Presidents of each country.Ultimately, the prosperity and security of Africa depends on extensive political and economic reform,and it is in the U.S. interest to support and promotesuch reforms.

57

IV. Conclusions

Today, on the brink of the twenty-first century, we arebuilding new frameworks, partnerships andinstitutions-and adapting existing ones-to strengthen America's security and prosperity. We are working toconstruct new cooperative security arrangements, ridthe world of weapons that target whole populations,build a truly global economy, and promote democratic values and economic reform. Because diplomatic andmilitary responses alone may not deter threats to ournational security from non-state actors such ascriminals and terrorist groups, we must promote increased cooperation among law enforcement officials and improved methods for dealing withinternational crime and terrorism. Ours is a momentof historic opportunity to create a safer, moreprosperous tomorrow-to make a difference in the livesof our citizens.This promising state of affairs did not just happen, andthere is no guarantee that it will endure. Thecontemporary era was forged by steadfast American leadership over the last half century-through effortssuch as the Marshall Plan, NATO, the United Nationsand the World Bank. The clear dangers of the pastmade the need for national security commitments andexpenditures obvious to the American people. Today,the task of mobilizing public support for national security priorities is more complicated. The complexarray of unique dangers, opportunities andresponsibilities outlined in this strategy are not always readily apparent as we go about our daily lives focusedon immediate concerns. Yet, in a more integrated andinterdependent world, we must remain actively engaged in world affairs to successfully advance ournational interests. To be secure and prosperous,America must continue to lead.

Our international leadership focuses on President Clinton's strategic priorities: to foster regional effortsled by the community of democratic nations topromote peace and prosperity in key regions of theworld, to create more jobs and opportunities forAmericans through a more open and competitive trading system that also benefits others around theworld, to increase cooperation in confronting newsecurity threats that defy borders and unilateral solutions, and to strengthen the intelligence, military,diplomatic and law enforcement tools necessary tomeet these challenges. Our international leadershipis ultimately founded upon the power of ourdemocratic ideals and values. The spread ofdemocracy supports American values and enhancesour security and prosperity. The United States willcontinue to support the trend toward democracy andfree markets by remaining actively engaged in theworld.

Our engagement abroad requires the active, sustained support of the American people and the bipartisan support of the U.S. Congress. This Administration remains committed to explaining our security interests,objectives and priorities to the nation and seeking thebroadest possible public and congressional support forour security programs and investments. We willcontinue to exercise our leadership in the world in amanner that reflects our national values and protectsthe security of this great nation.

59

